 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fundamental Development 
by Aaron Wolfe 
awolfesnotebook@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edition 1.1 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May wisdom guide your path, 
and may this gift bring fortune to all who benefit from it. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Index 
 
Meditation Posture 
Posture Choice 
Posture Control 
Mental Discipline 
Mental Discipline  
Mental Centering 
Awareness Development 
Physical Awareness 
Internal Awareness 
External Awareness 
Psychic Discipline 
Psychic Breathing 
Psychic Grounding 
 
 
3 
 
The Practical Development  
of Meditation Posture 
In Two Exercises 
 
In contemporary society, meditation practices of all kinds are becoming 
increasingly common. This is no doubt a good thing, generally speaking, but 
one of the most overlooked aspects of meditative training today is Posture. It is 
easy to find a hundred books on how to meditate, or what to meditate on, and 
all sorts of writing that is often as much nonsense as treasure. It is, as I have 
found, not quite as easy to find information on how to ​sit​ for meditation. This 
lack of information on such an important prerequisite is why the present 
chapter and its subsequent instruction on Posture Choice and Posture Control 
are offered here, since meditative training is also vitally important to future 
development. 
 
Posture Choice 
 
Before actually practicing the exercise of mastering a posture, one must 
naturally exert a certain effort on Posture Choice. It is difficult to call this an 
actual exercise, and it is also difficult to call it a simple set of rules or guiding 
principles. Posture Choice is very important because your Meditation Posture 
4 
 
is the foundation of most progress henceforth; it is literally how you will sit to 
do the other exercises. By all means, the most important factor in choosing 
such a seating is the users own intuition to choose a posture that simply feels 
right​. However, supposing that not everyone has this intuition or that most 
people want a more clear instruction, there are three fundamental principles to 
keep in mind when choosing a Posture. 
 
1) ​The chosen posture must be comfortable, but not so lax that basic posture 
alignment (spine, neck, etc) is lost. ​This means that your posture can be 
anything from Savasana (laying down) to Padmasana (Full Lotus), depending 
on your individual flexibility and interests. 
 
2)​ ​The chosen posture must not discourage Mental Discipline. ​For instance, 
if choosing an exceptionally relaxing posture like Savasana, it would be 
unwise to practice any exercise in a location where you would easily fall 
asleep. Likewise, a posture that is excessively uncomfortable and distracting 
should be avoided. 
 
3)​ ​The chosen posture must never be painful.​ Mild discomfort is to be 
expected, since parts of the body that are normally unused in this way must be 
trained to endure a new form of exercise. But this sort of gentle strain and 
discomfort should never become truly painful, and if you do experience pain, 
stop until you figure out why and how to correct it. 
 
5 
 
Benefits 
There are many benefits to choosing a dedicated practice posture. To begin 
with, mastering a specific posture will provide you with a physical foundation 
upon which to build your internal explorations later – the body, having been 
tamed and relaxed, will not distract you from your meditations. Repeatedly 
using the same posture to practice the same exercises can also develop a 
psychological “trigger,” where the posture itself will help you relax and begin 
meditating as soon as you sit down in it. Other benefits may be explored 
through experimentation and research. Much research has been done on Yoga 
and Qi Gong, both of which traditionally use static postures (Asana and Zhan 
Zhuang, respectively). 
 
Notes 
The chosen posture need not be the only posture ever used. For example, if you 
are particularly attracted to Padmasana and its benefits but lack the flexibility, 
it is perfectly sufficient to use more simple postures for your training while 
working through the flexibility development necessary for Padmasana. And 
once in Padmasana, other postures may also be learned for other situations. Do 
not mistakenly imagine that choosing a posture to begin your learning means 
that you will never use any other meditation posture. It may also be noted that a 
good resource for potential postures is the website for Yoga Journal Magazine, 
where (at the time of this writing) a list of Yoga Poses is presented and 
explained very nicely for the benefit of Yoga students. Those not familiar with 
6 
 
common postures may find this list beneficial, and may find it with a quick 
Google search. 
 
Posture Control 
 
Choosing a posture is simple enough, and even without the advice offered 
previously many practitioners discover an intuitive understanding of how to 
choose a posture that just “feels” right. This intuitive understanding is far more 
important than any rules or advice. However, a common mistake that stems 
from that situation is that once a posture is chosen, very few people also 
possess the intuitive knowledge of how to master it. Many people simply sit 
down and begin trying to perform this meditation or that, and then find their 
body to be a horrible distraction. The cure for this distraction is the exercise 
provided henceforth, rooted in the traditional practice of Asana and offered 
here as Posture Control. 
 
1)​ Before sitting in your Meditation Posture, it is helpful to stretch or perform 
simple calisthenics for up to fifteen minutes to prepare. The length of this step 
depends on the length of the following practice and experience, but in any case 
it is profoundly useful to loosen up. 
 
2)​ Take up your chosen Meditation Posture, making yourself as comfortable as 
possible. 
 
7 
 
3)​ ​Observe.​ As you attempt to sit patiently in your Posture, observe your body 
and pay attention to every detail that you can. At first there may be nothing, but 
soon you will become Aware of many discomforts and urges to move. 
 
4)​ ​Endure.​ Once you are Aware of the rising discomforts, attempt to endure 
them for as long as you can. When there is an itch, resist the urge to scratch it. 
When you wish to move, don't. Endure everything except real physical pain, 
which should be taken as a serious sign that something is wrong and that 
adjustments need to be made. 
 
5)​ ​Conquer. ​After enduring the rising discomforts, willfully choosing to not 
give into them, you must then conquer each one in turn. It must be understood 
that “conquer” here does not mean something violent, but simply that you must 
relax each discomfort until it is gone – where there is an itch, focus on it and 
relax until it stops. Where there is a twitch, focus on it and relax your muscles 
until you are still. 
 
6)​ ​Stillness.​ Having gone through every discomfort and conquering each one, 
you will slowly sink into the state of Posture Control proper – that is, Stillness. 
This is not a rigid state of tension, but is rather a state of complete relaxation 
and comfort. It is by reaching this state, after much practice, that you will be 
able to sit for hours at a time with no discomfort and no boredom. This is the 
foundation of all future meditative work. 
 
8 
 
Benefits 
A studious and observant practitioner will find many benefits to pursuing the 
ends of this practice. Most importantly, the chosen meditation posture will 
become very comfortable and easy to sit in, and the body will thus not be a 
distraction while meditative exercises are performed. More than this, 
however, is something far more important. Having gone through this process 
with one posture, the process itself will be learned and other postures can be 
mastered as well. For those interested, these principles can also be applied to 
other pursuits like Yoga or Zhan Zhuang. 
 
Notes 
There are three primary phases of Posture Control. First, as soon as you sit 
down, it will feel pleasant enough and comfortable as almost any time you sit 
down. Second, there will be discomfort (there should never be harsh pain, but 
discomfort is normal); your body begins to adjust to the posture, muscles 
normally unused get exercised, itches and tingles pop up, and perhaps your 
legs will fall asleep as well. Each of these discomforts must be endured and 
conquered as described in the practice. Third, having conquered every 
discomfort over a period of time and ​relaxed​ into the posture, it will become 
even more pleasant than the first phase. At times ecstatic, even blissful as you 
sit relaxed and completely comfortable. Every individual will experience each 
of these phases differently, but the end result will ultimately be the same: the 
posture will become very comfortable and easy to sit in even for long periods 
of time. The reason for this achievement must be understood as ​relaxation​, 
9 
 
however, because attempting to sit rigid and tense in your Meditation Posture 
is a trait of Step 4. This is part of the second phase of practice, and you must 
work beyond it to achieve Step 6. 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
The Meditative Development 
of Mental Discipline 
In Two Exercises 
 
Prerequisites
 
1)​ A chosen Meditation Posture and knowledge of how to sit for 
meditation. 
2)​ A minimum of 15-30 minutes to dedicate to the daily practice of meditation. 
 
Progression 
The progression of Mental Discipline exists primarily within the meditation 
practice described below. Each step should be take one at a time, as part of a 
process, even if you must spend some days or weeks developing your 
proficiency with a given step (as may be necessary for steps 3-5 of 
meditation). This is important, because the vital key to successful Mental 
Discipline is ​quality of practice​. It does not matter if you practice five minutes 
a day or five hours a day, as long as you practice with ​mindfulness​ and 
diligence​. Once the mind has relaxed and you have found a sense of Center in 
meditation, then you should progress to practicing Centering in daily life as 
well in order to slowly cultivate a constant state of mental relaxation and 
mindfulness. This constant mental peace is the primary point of extended 
meditative development. 
11 
 
 
Meditative Mental Discipline 
 
One of the most important and most universal introductory pursuits of all 
spiritual and metaphysical arts is Mental Discipline. This, if nothing else, truly 
is universal amongst all the old and new schools of thought, and everyone 
worth their salt agrees that the mind must be tamed before more complex 
exercises can be learned effectively and correctly. There are many ways to 
cultivate Mental Discipline because of this, since most schools have their own 
ideas of how Mental Discipline is best achieved. Some schools of thought rely 
on only one meditation, while others have a few which are used progressively. 
The following practice falls into the latter category where each step, even the 
first, is a meditative practice all on its own in some traditional art or another. 
 
1) ​Take up your Meditation Posture, as learned previously. 
 
2) ​Breathe slowly but regularly to relax and get in the moment. The common 
four-fold breath is good for this achievement, where you inhale for four 
seconds and exhale for four seconds in a smooth rhythm. 
 
3) ​Turn your attention inwards, watching your mind. As thoughts and feelings 
come up, detach yourself from them and passively observe them. Do not get 
carried away in daydreams, just maintain a sense of detached observation and 
observe your mental activity as if it were something separate from you. 
12 
 
 
4) ​Once the mind has relaxed from your passive observation and there is less 
activity, turn your attention upon a single thought or focal point. Concentrate on 
this focal point, silencing all other mental activity until only the focal point 
exists in your mind. 
 
5) ​Upon successfully concentrating on a single point without getting distracted 
or interrupted by other thoughts, begin to let go of the focal point. Relax your 
mind slowly into a state of Mental Silence. 
 
6) ​After relaxing into the state of Mental Silence, where mental activity is 
relaxed and your mind rests in a state of void, sit and bask in this state for the 
rest of the session. This relaxed state of Mental Silence is the heart of Mental 
Discipline, and should be cultivated so that it positively influences your mind 
in daily life. 
 
Benefits 
The most potent benefits of this practice should be obvious. As the mind is 
trained to relax, the chaotic storm of mental activity that occurs in mind of most 
people becomes tamed. With this sense of mental relaxation comes a stronger 
clarity of mind, better concentration, and more mental energy over all – since 
the mind is learning to not wander around like a storm, all of the energy that 
would have been used on those passing thoughts and daydreams becomes 
reserved and focused on your concentration instead. 
13 
 
 
Notes 
Go slowly with each step. As mentioned in the introduction, each step is a 
meditation in and of itself, put together and organized into this progression so 
that Mental Discipline can be cultivated somewhat more quickly and 
efficiently. Do not rush through steps 3-5 in particular, take your time and 
spend some minutes on each step so that you really exercise and discipline 
your mind. This exercise should become a daily habit, and once you develop 
Internal Awareness later on you will learn to deepen this practice infinitely – 
for in this, the mind is layered. Conquering the outer activity of the mind will 
seem easy, and then you will look deeper to find the inner mind and will have 
to start all over again. With that, you will find the greatest progress. 
 
The Practice of Centering 
 
Cultivating your Mental Discipline through meditation will have a great many 
benefits on your daily life, far too many to properly list. But as the process 
happens there will come incidents where you find it difficult to concentrate – 
having become more aware of your mind through the practice of meditation, 
you come upon the realization that your mind is a storm in your daily life. 
Since these moments occur while you are busy with some aspect of life, it is 
not practical to sit down and meditate right then and there in order to reign in 
the mind's activity. To solve this dilemma, there is a simple application of 
Mental Discipline that is known simply as Centering. 
14 
 
 
1) ​Stop whatever you are doing, taking a moment to yourself. At first this may 
take several moments, but later on you will be able to go through this process 
more quickly. 
 
2) ​Turn your awareness inwards. Breathe if you like, using the rhythm of your 
breath as a quick focal point that is always with you. This opportunity should 
allow you to swiftly pass through the Observation and Concentration portions 
of Mental Discipline. How swift depends entirely on the skill and development 
cultivated in meditation – if you fail to develop yourself in meditation, you 
will not find quick success in Centering. 
 
3) ​Relax the mind to Mental Silence, letting go of the mental stress and activity 
that abounds so that you are relaxed and calm. Recall the feelings, the mental 
peace that you acquired during your meditation practice, and focus on those 
feelings. Summon them and return to that state actively. Once Mental Silence 
has been achieved to the same state cultivated in the Mental Discipline 
meditation, you have successfully Centered. 
 
Benefits 
The primary benefit of Centering is gaining the capacity to silence your mind 
any time you need to, anywhere you need to, for any reason you need to. Life 
presents us with many challenges, and the untamed mind is happy to imagine 
and exaggerate all sorts of problems. By gaining the capacity to Center swiftly 
15 
 
and easily, the mind will become shortly tamed and you will find yourself at an 
almost constant state of peace and concentration. 
 
Notes 
The most important thing to be aware of in regards to Centering is that your 
success with Centering is directly related to your success with Mental 
Discipline. If you do not practice Mental Discipline in order to find and 
develop your Center, then you will find it difficult to Center throughout the day. 
Likewise, the more that you practice and develop Mental Discipline, the easier 
it will be to Center. The second important thing to note is that with practice of 
both Mental Discipline and Centering, this peaceful state of Center or Mental 
Silence will slowly become your normal state of mind, and ​that​ is the true goal 
of Mental Discipline. Meditative states of mind are useless if they do not 
positively influence your daily life, so while you deepen your meditations, 
remember that those states of mind are meant to become your new "norm." 
 
 
16 
 
The Meditative Development 
of Awareness 
In Three Exercises 
 
Prerequisites 
1)​ Knowledge of meditation posture and how to sit for meditation. 
2) ​Experience with meditation. In particular, the ability to relax the mind to 
Center or Mental Silence. 
3) ​Understanding of the difference between and the relationship of Awareness 
and Consciousness. 
 
Progression 
These three exercises are essentially meant to cultivate one thing: 
Self-Awareness. By developing Physical Awareness, you begin to understand 
what Awareness is and how to directly control it. By practicing Internal 
Awareness, you begin to exercise true Introspection and you begin to 
understand how Awareness can be used to gain insight and understanding, as 
well as how you can gain Discernment of different things by paying attention to 
differences and similarities. And lastly, by practicing External Awareness, you 
begin to really pay attention to your surroundings and the relationship that 
"you" have to what is around you, and how Awareness (and also 
17 
 
Consciousness, by extension) is something that is not restricted to the physical 
body. 
 
Meditative Development of Physical Awareness 
 
Of all the exercises presented here, this one may be the most simple and easy 
to learn. Although this exercise ​was​ initially picked up from a Psion 
community, later study of such things as Body Awareness as taught in Israel 
Regardie’s One Year Manual allowed for a better understanding and 
refinement of this particular exercise. It is from learning the simple principles 
offered there and expanding upon them that everything henceforth, that is the 
development of the following two exercises as they are presented here, came 
to be. This first exercise is particularly important, for it offers an easy and 
almost mundane introduction to what will slowly come to be a potent 
metaphysical skill if training is pursued to its natural end. 
 
1) ​Take up your Meditation Posture. For this particular exercise, Savasana is 
especially beneficial if it is not your normal posture. Relax the mind to Mental 
Silence. 
 
2)​ Relax physically and focus your Awareness on your lower body, starting 
with your feet. What do you feel? Simply pay attention. Wiggle your toes a 
little if you want, and be aware of everything you feel in your feet. 
 
18 
 
3)​ Shift your Awareness up from your feet, moving it up your legs. Be Aware 
of how your legs feel, the state of tension and relaxation and how your skin 
feels – every minute detail. 
 
4)​ Continue moving your Awareness up your body one section at a time until 
you get to your head, paying attention to every detail that you can. Take notice. 
Pay attention to every minute detail – the tingling of nerves firing, tension, 
relaxation, itching, twitching. Be Aware of everything. 
 
5)​ Move your Awareness back down your body, from head to toe, still paying 
attention to everything that you can. Repeat 2 through 4 several times trying to 
feel more with each pass up and down your body, paying attention to more, 
being Aware of more. This is a process of learning how to pay attention to 
sensation, learning how to move Awareness, and learning what your body feels 
like – which will help you discern the difference between common physical 
tingles and the more intense metaphysical feelings of energy later on. 
 
6) ​Still maintaining your posture and mental Center, concentrate and focus your 
Awareness and then expand it over your skin to every corner of your body. Pay 
particular attention to anything you "feel," whether it is a tingle or an itch (do 
not scratch it, simply note the feeling and being aware of it). Be Aware of the 
feelings against your skin and the muscle movements under it as you breathe – 
the feeling of your clothes against skin, the feeling of your hairs, any air 
moving against you, the tingles of nerves firing. Try to remain still as you 
19 
 
concentrate on your practice. Focus on your sense of touch, but be Aware of 
everything you feel going on with your body. When you can maintain this 
expanded Awareness without losing concentration or focusing too much on any 
one part, you've succeeded with this practice. 
 
Benefits 
There are two primary benefits to this exercise. First is that you begin to 
understand Awareness, what it is, how to move it and how to receive 
information through it – in this case the information is physical and can be 
verified easily, but later on you will learn how to receive information 
metaphysically from other objects and people. Second, here you are exploring 
your own body and learning of all the sensations and physical feelings that you 
have. This is thus an important practice, because doing this establishes the 
foundation of physical knowledge, and later on you will be able to more easily 
discern between what is a physically inspired sensation and what is a 
metaphysically inspired sensation. For working with energy, spirits, 
constructs, and any other metaphysical force, this capacity for discernment is 
vital. 
 
Notes 
That last bit of Step 6 sounds simple enough, doesn't it? "Focus on your sense 
of touch." It ​is​ that simple, but it is not a matter of simply feeling what you 
touch with your hands – though it is the same sensation. Do you feel with your 
hands? Now learn to feel with your entire body, and more importantly with 
20 
 
your mind. This is an exercise in being Aware of the feelings of your entire 
body at the same time, from head to toe. This requires a fair bit of 
concentration at first, which is why I suggest it be learned after practicing 
meditation and centering for a while. Eventually, you will not need to spend 
much time on steps 2 to 5, as you will have enough experience and skill to 
simply expand your Awareness and practice full body Awareness from the 
start. But until you get to that point, practice diligently. 
 
The Meditative Development of Internal Awareness 
 
The development of Internal Awareness is actually a very old and classical 
practice of many spiritual and metaphysical traditions. Commonly known by 
the name Introspection, it is to this that the Oracle alluded when she spoke 
"Man! Know Thyself!" For it is by this practice, by turning the Inner Eye upon 
itself, that we come to understand ourselves as truly as we may think we 
understand other things or other people. It should be noted that there is no end 
to this exercise, no completion or end attainment. Even once proficiency has 
been gained and you move on, the depths of your soul are great and you are an 
ever changing person. It is wise to pursue this practice regularly. 
 
1)​ Take up your meditation posture and relax the mind to Mental Silence. 
 
2)​ Turn the Awareness inwards. With the Physical Awareness exercise, the 
mind was turned upon the body, so now turn the mind upon the mind. Even 
21 
 
sitting in basic Mental Silence, thoughts still try to surface and disturb the 
mind. Thus, turn the Awareness inwards and observe them. 
 
3)​ As thoughts rise, and sometimes emotions, observe them. This is a different 
observance than in basic Mental Discipline. Whereas in Mental Discipline the 
aim is to become aware of the mind so that it can relax and reach silence, here 
you explore why the thought and emotion is there in the first place. Suppose a 
song pops into your head – why is it there? Did you hear it on the radio, did 
you buy it on iTunes? Did you like it or dislike it? What about it did you like or 
dislike? Why? Explore what comes up, follow the trail and see where it leads. 
 
4) ​As with Thought Observation, the more you watch the mind the more it shyly 
quiets down. As this happens with Step 3, and surfacing thoughts and feelings 
decreases, it becomes time to dig instead. Choose a subject from your psyche 
that you wish to explore – maybe you have a short temper and want to know 
why, maybe you wish to learn how you can become more patient. Choose 
something and turn your Awareness inwards. Mentally explore your past habits 
with the subject, why you feel or think a certain way about the subject. Dig 
deep and explore. 
 
5) ​Having explored the thoughts and emotions of the mind, as well as the 
sensations of the body earlier on, you should now have a distinct Awareness of 
your own Mind and Body. With this as a foundation, you can push Internal 
Awareness a step further by paying particular attention to ones inner self 
22 
 
before and after other activities, be it basic energy work or some complex 
practice. Knowing your self as a foundation, what your mundane mind and 
body feel like, you can turn your Awareness to the differences that pop up 
during a metaphysical experience. Is a particular sensation different than your 
ordinary physical feelings? Is a thought that pops into your head yours, or 
someone else's? Having explored what is your self, you can now explore what 
is not. Go slow with this, but do go with it. 
 
6)​ There is a peculiar point with Step 5 of this exercise where you are 
distinctly Aware of sensations which are distinctly different from the nerve 
signals discovered in the Physical Awareness Training and distinctly different 
from anything mental as experienced in the earlier steps of Internal Awareness. 
This peculiar point of Step 5 marks the success of that step and the beginning 
of this one. Having successfully extended Awareness into the “Soul,” or energy 
system as such, it is time to explore it. Different physical and mental actions 
will influence this system in different ways, as all physical and mental actions 
exert metaphysical influence in ​some​ way. Having developed Awareness to 
this point, look even further within yourself to mentally discern the subtle 
nature of the “Soul” and all its parts. Cosmology helps greatly here, as 
different cosmologies have names for these different parts of the “Soul” or 
“Energy Body” and you can explore them each in turn directly. Lacking a 
preferred cosmology is not a problem though, just make notes of what you 
experience with as much detail as you can muster. 
 
23 
 
Benefits 
The primary benefits of this meditation lies in the application of true 
Introspection, which in truth is what the whole pursuit properly is. As the 
layers of the mind and heart are relaxed and the Awareness seeps deeper into 
the Psyche, one finds the energy system. As the Awareness explores the energy 
system deeper and deeper, the educated student will be able to discern where 
metaphysical imbalances or blockages are, how to repair them, and many other 
pursuits besides. More immediately, developing this Awareness of energy 
system also allows for the correct practice of Energy Work, for the student 
will be able to discern what actually happens metaphysically when those 
exercises are performed. 
 
Notes 
Each step of the practice needs to be taken one at a time. It may take several 
sessions, even several months sometimes, to accomplish the work of one step. 
Remember to be patient and to explore each step as fully as possible even once 
you have moved on. It does not take long to gain basic proficiency in the 
principles offered here, but it can take a lifetime to gain proper mastery. 
Especially if you do not pursue the principles diligently, because it’s not just 
regular practice that counts but correct practice too. 
 
The Meditative Development of External Awareness 
 
24 
 
This is perhaps the more natural extension of the first exercise, and is indeed 
where the transition begins from purely physical practice to an ever more 
metaphysical practice. While the first meditation is easily enough mastered, 
caution should be heeded with this third practice – as Awareness expands 
further and further, always verify your experiences to the best of your ability. 
In this transition from physical to metaphysical awareness, it is easy enough to 
imagine things even with strict mental discipline. But once progress is had the 
applications for this skill, both physical and metaphysical, are vast. This 
practice should thus be taken both seriously and be seriously enjoyed. 
 
1)​ Take up your meditation posture and relax the mind to Mental Silence. 
 
2) ​Extend the Awareness to cover the whole Physical Body, as per the final 
step of Physical Awareness. 
 
3)​ Extend the Awareness beyond the Body in a growing sphere – do not 
visualize a sphere, just become progressively Aware of everything 
around you while favoring no one direction. This is easy enough at first when 
your Senses are used correctly – your sense of touch, your sense of sound. You 
can "feel," quite naturally, your immediate surroundings. What you need to do 
now is pay attention to this and actually become Aware of your immediate 
surroundings – the "space" immediately around you. The place where you are 
sitting, anything that is under you or above you or around you. Pay attention, 
25 
 
developing a mental comprehension of the spatial relationship between you 
and your surroundings. 
 
4) ​Expand the Awareness further, into the range of the Aura. Having developed 
a basic Awareness of Soul in the previous meditation, it should not be difficult 
with practice to be Aware of the Aura. Again, do not imagine a sphere, but 
extend the Awareness into the Aura itself and discern its shape and feeling on 
your own. This is may take time, but it is worth it for application in other 
areas. If you cannot or do not wish to feel the actual Aura, just consider “about 
one meter in every direction” your goal instead. 
 
5)​ With the Awareness firmly fixed on the Aura or the spatial range of it, now 
turn the Awareness to everything within the Aura. In Step 3 of this exercise you 
expanded Awareness to discern the basic spatial relationship between you and 
the objects in your surroundings. Now, with your Awareness expanded to the 
range of the Aura, begin instead to study and observe everything within this 
space along with your relationship to it. Do not worry for minute details or 
metaphysical qualities yet, just ​pay attention​ and see what you notice. This, 
presently, is still an exercise in Physical Awareness, or Awareness of External 
Physical Things – the Aura is merely a medium for such, but it can be a useful 
medium for those interested in energy work later on. 
 
6) ​Having studied the surroundings within the spatial range of the Aura to 
satisfaction, extend the Awareness ​beyond​ the Aura (distinction important: do 
26 
 
not extend the Aura, but move the Awareness itself beyond it) to encompass the 
rest of the room or surroundings. As with the study of objects within the 
immediate surroundings, study also the objects in the rest of the room – where 
everything is in relation to you, the shapes of things, the sounds and movements 
and actions of any people. How far the Awareness is expanded beyond the 
body is a matter of practice and preference. Awareness is not strictly bound by 
Space, and one can be Aware of something on the opposite side of the planet 
with more advanced training. 
 
Benefits 
The primary benefit of this meditation lies in its nature as the development of 
the Awareness as something not bound to the Mind or Body but as a sort of 
Mental Sense (as Touch is a Physical Sense), and in the subtle transition from 
Physical to Metaphysical Awareness – what is learned here can just as easily 
be applied to Awareness of the metaphysical surroundings, discerning the 
metaphysical qualities and forces which occupy a given area. You can slowly 
develop a sensitivity to other people’s Auras or energy in general, and Martial 
Artists should notice many practical applications of this pursuit involving 
increased Awareness of one’s surroundings and also one’s opponent. When 
warrior’s speak of awareness, it is this to which they speak. 
 
Notes 
As the Awareness is developed through this exercise, as you actually become 
Aware of your surroundings and the objects within it, always verify your 
27 
 
experiences at the end of the session. If in your Awareness, with your eyes 
closed, you discern a detail that you cannot credit to memory, get up and go 
look at the end of your session to see if it is there just as you were Aware of it 
in your meditation. If it was, make note of this and continue practicing 
correctly. If any of your experiences during the meditation prove wrong upon 
being checked, reel in your imagination with further Mental Discipline and 
practice more. Do this with all of your experiences. The more you are able to 
verify your successes, the more confidence you will build; the more you make 
note of your failures, the better you will be able to repair mistakes. This is also 
why the actual meditation focuses on your physical surroundings – physical 
surroundings can be verified easily, and once confidence is built as such, you 
can move on to metaphysical subjects with more skill and discernment later on. 
 
 
 
28 
 
The Meditative Development 
of Psychic Discipline 
In Two Exercises 
 
Prerequisites 
1) ​Knowledge of Meditation Posture and the ability to relax the mind to Mental 
Silence. 
2)​ The ability to breathe in a calm, ​controlled​ rhythm. 
 
3)​ The development of Internal Awareness, sufficient to discern different 
Qualities of The Psyche​ – stress, emotions, character traits – and how they 
influence you. 
 
Progression 
The progression of this practice may be a little different at first from some of 
the other exercises done before now. The whole of each exercise here is done 
easily, and is measured by the breath. The measure of progress here is thus 
quality over quantity​. At first it may be difficult to exhale a Psychic Quality, 
such as nervousness or fear, but by focusing on the quality of each breath you 
will become better at the actual exercise. This means that although you may not 
be able to get rid of all of your nervousness with the full twenty breaths at first, 
with time you will refine this skill so that you may expel all of the quality with 
29 
 
a single breath. With even further mastery of the exercise, you may learn to 
banish imbalances with a single thought, and this sort of skill is the purpose of 
this training. Through the meditative breathing exercise, the skill itself is 
refined while deeper Psychic Fortitude is developed – as there is success with 
this, Grounding is used throughout the day to deepen Fortitude even further and 
to maintain daily peace. 
 
The Meditative Exercise of Psychic Breathing 
 
Throughout the years, different circles of metaphysical practitioners have 
developed a plethora of different methods to practice Grounding. From simple 
thought control to elaborate and complex visualizations, the imagination and 
creativity of psychics and occultists have been long established. But for all of 
this imagination, many practitioners have overlooked the single most natural, 
almost universal method of Grounding. The one thing that everyone is told to 
do, even in daily mundane life: “when you are upset, ​breathe​.” The following 
exercise will reveal a simple method of consciously breathing so that 
unwanted Psychic Qualities can be released through the breath, with no 
elaborate visualizations necessary. It is through this practice that the core 
principles of Grounding will be learned. 
 
1) ​Take up your Meditation Posture and relax the mind to Mental Silence. 
 
30 
 
2) ​Inhale slowly, through the nose. Do not think of anything while you inhale. 
It’s important that you maintain Mental Silence here. 
 
3) ​Turn your Awareness to an undesired Psychic Quality within. Focus your 
Awareness on it, and focus on the relationship that the Psychic Quality has to 
your breath. Do not visualize, just concentrate.  
 
4) ​With the undesired Psychic Quality attached to the breath, exhale through the 
nose while concentrating so that the Quality is released into the universe upon 
being expelled from your system. 
 
5) ​Repeat steps 2-4 for no more than twenty breaths, focusing attentively on the 
expelling of the Psychic Quality that has been chosen. 
 
6) ​Upon the completion of Step Five, practice Internal Awareness to measure 
the effectiveness of the session – explore yourself and discern 
whether or 
not the Psychic Quality was influenced at all, and how so if it was. 
 
 
Benefits 
The most important benefit of this exercise is the active cultivation of what 
some call The Grounded State, but I refer to here as a state of Psychic 
Fortitude. This is very similar to, and somewhat related to, the mental Center 
state that is cultivated in Meditation. A key difference is that Center is mainly a 
calm mind whereas one’s state of Fortitude may be considered a calm heart, is 
31 
 
related to the so-called energy system, and also to what some call the Soul or 
Astral Body. Emotions, deeper Qualities of the Psyche, and also the health and 
qualities of the energy system can all be regulated through the breathing 
exercise offered here. It’s just a matter of applying the exercise to your own 
paradigm of how such things work, because regardless of how you wish to 
explain the philosophy of this exercise it tends to work for everyone that 
knows how to breathe. 
 
Notes 
It cannot be stressed enough that you should not practice this exercise to 
excess. Focus on the quality of each breath, not the number of breaths that you 
are doing. Eventually, with Grounding, you will be able to exhale an entire 
quality (such as nervousness before a test) with a single breath, and this is 
what you should aspire to develop with your Psychic Breathing practice. 
Another warning that must be delivered is that you should not work on specific 
Qualities to excess, either. If you have an irrational fear that makes your life 
uncomfortable, you can use Psychic Breathing to conquer it by simply exhaling 
it a little each day until it is gone forever; but do not forget that fear in general 
is a warning signal, and those who completely lack fear are usually foolish in 
their behavior. Character Development of this sort is a powerful tool for 
personal transformation, but in all such pursuits you should strive for ​balance. 
 
The Practice of Psychic Grounding 
 
32 
 
Although Psychic Breathing as a meditative exercise is good for learning the 
process of expelling Qualities of The Psyche, and it is especially good for 
overcoming deep-rooted qualities like irrational fear or addiction over a 
period of time, it is not especially suitable for on-demand use. And that is, 
naturally, where this skill of Grounding is most useful. Whether you are in a 
high-stress job or you just get spooked easily, the ability to stop for a moment, 
take a deep breath and ​actually​ get rid of your disturbance by doing so is 
profoundly useful. This on-demand application of Psychic Breathing is what is 
here considered Grounding proper. 
 
1)​ Stop whatever is being done for a moment and turn your Inner Awareness to 
the Psychic Quality that is disturbing you. 
 
2)​ Take a deep breath. Inhale through the nose, focusing your Awareness on the 
Psychic Quality you wish to release, and exhale slowly. This is the same 
Psychic Breathing practiced previously, just done on the spot instead of with 
the meditative depth exercised previously. 
 
3)​ Repeat Step 2 until the Psychic Quality is released and you are in your 
Grounded State, a state of Psychic Fortitude. How well you can slip into this 
Fortitude depends on your skill in both Internal Awareness and Psychic 
Breathing. 
 
Benefits 
33 
 
The primary benefit of Grounding is that it can be used on any Psychic Quality, 
just like your regular Psychic Breathing exercise, but it can be used quickly 
and throughout the day. As Centering is used to develop concentration and 
mental calm, Grounding is used to develop clarity and emotional calm. 
Whether it is mundane stress or emotional imbalance, or even a metaphysical 
energy disturbance, Grounding can be used to swiftly release the excess and 
return you to your state of Fortitude. This is important, because like Centering 
allows you to cultivate “Center” as a normal state of being, Grounding 
likewise cultivates your state of Fortitude throughout the day so that you slowly 
make it your normal state of being. 
 
Notes 
An important thing to note with basic Grounding is that, even with a more 
developed mastery of the fundamental skill, it typically does not conquer deep 
rooted Psychic Qualities on its own. Rather, it is more of an in-the-moment 
treatment of symptoms. If you are working against an addiction, for example, 
whenever you experience a desire to indulge you can pause for a moment and 
Ground that urge; but you will be exhaling the urge, not the reason why you had 
the urge. This is never the less a useful tool for personal transformation, but it 
must be understood that deeper and bigger things must be changed slowly and 
over a long periods of time, not instantly.  
34 
