Irida Altman
Lit Aspects of Maths
July 2023
LITERARY ASPECTS OF MATHEMATICS 
SEMF Summer School 
Valencia, 24–28 July 2023 
Time:  
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, 12:00–14:00. 
Abstract:  
This mini-course explores storytelling, semiotic, and interpretational approaches to 
mathematics that uncover forgotten and oft-ignored literary aspects of the 
mathematical practice. Half of the course will investigate ideas in existing literature 
while the other half will deliver advances in ongoing research. This is both a lecture 
course and a discussion forum. Participants are not expected to be mathematicians or 
literary experts. Everyone is welcome, those who just wish to listen and those who 
would like to engage in the discussion. On a meta-level, the course is also meant to 
disseminate ideas that might take root in different guises across different ﬁelds. 
Structure of each session (approx within given timeframe): 
12:10–13:00   Lecture: General introduction to the material 
13:00–13:20   Break: Opportunity to leave, if you’re not staying for the discussion 
13:20–13:50   Discussion: Audience participation actively encouraged 
Attendance:  
This is a four-session course. Participants who wish to get the most out of it, are 
encouraged to attend all four sessions. However, as there are other courses going on, 
full attendance might not be possible. For convenience, below you have prerequisite 
chart, where the arrows show the dependencies of material.  
Of course, nothing is cast in stone—you are welcome to attend as you wish. 
 
1 of 
2
Lecture 1
Discussion 1
Lecture 2
Discussion 2
Lecture 3
Discussion 3
Lecture 4
Discussion 4
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Discussions cannot be meaningfully attended without attending their corresponding Lectures. 
Lecture 2 depends only weakly on Lecture 1.  
Lecture 4 depends strongly on Lecture 3.  
Lectures 3 and 4 can be attended without having attended Lectures 1 and 2.
Irida Altman
Lit Aspects of Maths
July 2023
SESSION BREAKDOWN 
Monday  ➛ Narrative Elements in Mathematics: comparing stories and mathematical 
texts (Dietiker and Thomas) 
Tuesday ➛ The Characters in Mathematics: discussing one approach to characters in 
mathematical texts and the consequences of such an approach (Rotman). 
Wednesday ➛ Presentations and presentations system: the units of mathematical 
texts, but also more generally the units in all semiotic practices (regardless of ﬁeld, 
genre, scientiﬁc and artistic content!) 
Thursday ➛ Translation: the key mechanism of interpretation that binds presentations 
together (with a focus on mathematics, but with the possibilities of integrating 
everything from hard sciences, natural sciences, social science, to arts and music). 
REFERENCES FOR LECTURES 1–2 
(You do NOT need to read this material to follow the Lectures & Discussions) 
Dietiker, Leslie. 2013. ‘Mathematical Texts as Narrative: Rethinking Curriculum’. For the 
Learning of Mathematics 33 (3): 14–19. 
Thomas, R.S.D. 2007. ‘The Comparison Of Mathematics With Narrative’. In Perspectives On 
Mathematical Practices, edited by Bart Van Kerkhove and Jean Paul Van Bendegem, 43–59. 
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/1-4020-5034-8_3. 
Rotman, Brian. 2000. Excerpt from ‘Towards a Semiotics of Mathematics’. In Mathematics as 
Sign: Writing, Imagining, Counting, 4-41 without 21-37. Writing Science. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press. 
READING BEYOND THE COURSE 
(Historical arguments and case studies; mathematical aspects of literature) 
Doxiadis, Apostolos K., and Barry Mazur, eds. 2012. Circles Disturbed: The Interplay of 
Mathematics and Narrative. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Tubbs, Robert, Alice Jenkins, and Nina Engelhardt, eds. 2021. The Palgrave Handbook of 
Literature and Mathematics. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. 
REFERENCES FOR LECTURES 3–4 OR FURTHER QUESTIONS/DISCUSSIONS 
Talk to me in person in Valencia or online. 
Discord channel for the summer school: #altman 
Discord handle: iarxiv 
Email: irida.altman@gess.ethz.ch
2 of 
2
