Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
1 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 13 December 2019
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02688
Edited by: 
Robert Prentner,  
University of California,  
Irvine, United States
Reviewed by: 
Clifford Ian Workman,  
University of Pennsylvania,  
United States
Valentina Cuccio,  
University of Parma, Italy
*Correspondence: 
Michael Levin 
michael.levin@tufts.edu
†ORCID: 
Michael Levin 
orcid.org/0000-0001-7292-8084 
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to  
Theoretical and Philosophical 
Psychology,  
a section of the journal  
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 26 August 2019
Accepted: 14 November 2019
Published: 13 December 2019
Citation:
Levin M (2019) The Computational 
Boundary of a “Self”: Developmental 
Bioelectricity Drives Multicellularity 
and Scale-Free Cognition.
Front. Psychol. 10:2688.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02688
The Computational Boundary of a 
“Self”: Developmental Bioelectricity 
Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free 
Cognition
Michael Levin1,2*†
1 Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, Medford, MA, United States, 2 Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, 
Harvard University, Boston, MA, United States
All epistemic agents physically consist of parts that must somehow comprise an integrated 
cognitive self. Biological individuals consist of subunits (organs, cells, and molecular networks) 
that are themselves complex and competent in their own native contexts. How do coherent 
biological Individuals result from the activity of smaller sub-agents? To understand the 
evolution and function of metazoan creatures’ bodies and minds, it is essential to conceptually 
explore the origin of multicellularity and the scaling of the basal cognition of individual cells 
into a coherent larger organism. In this article, I synthesize ideas in cognitive science, 
evolutionary biology, and developmental physiology toward a hypothesis about the origin of 
Individuality: “Scale-Free Cognition.” I propose a fundamental definition of an Individual based 
on the ability to pursue goals at an appropriate level of scale and organization and suggest 
a formalism for defining and comparing the cognitive capacities of highly diverse types of 
agents. Any Self is demarcated by a computational surface – the spatio-temporal boundary 
of events that it can measure, model, and try to affect. This surface sets a functional boundary - 
a cognitive “light cone” which defines the scale and limits of its cognition. I hypothesize that 
higher level goal-directed activity and agency, resulting in larger cognitive boundaries, evolve 
from the primal homeostatic drive of living things to reduce stress – the difference between 
current conditions and life-optimal conditions. The mechanisms of developmental 
bioelectricity - the ability of all cells to form electrical networks that process information - 
suggest a plausible set of gradual evolutionary steps that naturally lead from physiological 
homeostasis in single cells to memory, prediction, and ultimately complex cognitive agents, 
via scale-up of the basic drive of infotaxis. Recent data on the molecular mechanisms of 
pre-neural bioelectricity suggest a model of how increasingly sophisticated cognitive functions 
emerge smoothly from cell-cell communication used to guide embryogenesis and regeneration. 
This set of hypotheses provides a novel perspective on numerous phenomena, such as 
cancer, and makes several unique, testable predictions for interdisciplinary research that 
have implications not only for evolutionary developmental biology but also for biomedicine 
and perhaps artificial intelligence and exobiology.
Keywords: development, bioelectricity, gap junctions, primitive cognition, active inference
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
2 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
INTRODUCTION: DEEP PROBLEMS 
WITH SOMETHING FUNDAMENTAL  
IN COMMON
Why did some competent unicellular organisms join together 
to form complex bodies, and how do they cooperate during 
highly robust embryogenesis and regeneration of anatomical 
structures? Why does this process break down during 
carcinogenic defection from the body plan? How can we  best 
understand and control biological systems that consist of 
numerous nested levels of organization, such as bacteria and 
biofilms, which can functionally interact with the host’s cells, 
tissues, and organs? How are lower level (molecular and cellular) 
activities harnessed toward adaptive system-level outcomes 
during regulative development and adaptation to novel stressors? 
What is the relationship between the ability of cells to implement 
invariant organ-level morphogenetic goal states and the purposive 
activity of brains? What dynamics enable the scaling of cognitive 
capacities from the simple memory functions found in bacteria 
to those of sophisticated minds?
All these fundamental biological problems have one thing 
in common: the need to understand and formalize what a 
coherent Individual or Agent is, in a way that is compatible 
with a gradual co-evolution of minds and bodies (Tarnita et al., 
2013). While significant work has addressed this topic from 
an evolutionary perspective, I  suggest a different and 
complementary view called Scale-Free Cognition, synthesizing 
ideas from theories of computation and control to identify 
common information-processing events occurring at multiple 
levels of organization. I  propose a semi-quantitative metric, 
based on the spatio-temporal boundaries of events that systems 
measure and try to control, that can be  used to define and 
compare the cognitive boundaries for highly diverse types of 
agents (which could be biological, exo-biological, or artificial). 
Ideas from the fields of proto-cognition, developmental 
biophysics, and information theory offer a novel lens with 
which to understand the evolution, development, physiology, 
and behavior of a wide range of living systems. Focusing on 
information processing and decision-making enables a unifying 
conception of goal-directedness in biological systems, which 
naturally scales from simple homeostatic pathways to complex 
cognition via evolutionarily ancient physiological mechanisms 
of cell-cell communication. Here, I  illustrate these hypotheses 
from the perspective of developmental bioelectricity, which 
evolution has robustly exploited for cognitive scaling; however, 
the same general scheme applies to any similar mechanism, 
whether chemical, physical, or other.
These ideas are explored here from the perspective of the 
following three core assumptions. First is a commitment to 
evolution: every capacity has a natural history and emerged 
from simpler variants. Closely related is the idea that cognition, 
like “organism status” (Child, 1915; Queller and Strassmann, 
2009), is not a binary capacity that exists in higher organisms 
only (Figure  1). Thus, it is fundamentally incorrect to view 
functional capacities such as memory, prediction, goal-
directedness, etc. as entirely new features appropriate only to 
advanced forms of life, or to view descriptions of cognitive 
capacities in primitive or aneural organisms as category mistakes 
(Baluška and Levin, 2016). Indeed, failure to appreciate cognitive 
processes in a system that would have otherwise improved 
prediction and control is a “neganthropomorphic fallacy” – a 
type 1 error that is as bad for empirical research as is profligate 
anthropomorphic reasoning. This is a kind of “intentional 
stance” (Dennett, 1987) approach, generalized beyond brains 
and behavior. Thus, here it is assumed that there is no such 
thing as magical “true cognition” that is the province of humans, 
without a smooth history of precursor capacities in simpler 
forms, stretching back to the base of the tree of life (Dennett, 
2017; Ginsburg et  al., 2019). Second, it is assumed that all 
metaphors are to be judged by their utility in driving scientific 
progress and that there is not a binary categorization of scientific 
pictures which should be  taken literally or not, which can 
be  decided a priori. Thus, whether a way of thinking about 
a system is correct or mere metonymy is to be  determined 
by whether the specific metaphor gives rise to new, robust 
research programs – it is an empirical question to be answered 
in time, based on whether a given metaphor improves prediction 
and control in novel cases at the bench, compared to other 
existing metaphors. Third, much of the discussion centers 
around “goals”, related to teleology, a hotly debated topic (Nagel, 
1979; Ruse, 1989; Teufel, 2011; McShea, 2012, 2013, 2016; 
Kolchinsky and Wolpert, 2018): here goal-directedness is taken 
in the non-magical, cybernetic, engineering, and control theory 
sense, of a feedback system that operates to maximize some 
specific state of affairs (which can be modeled as a dynamical 
system with attractors in its state space). Finally, except for a 
few brief remarks at the end, no claims about consciousness 
(first person experience or a sense of self as qualia) are made: 
all of the examples concern functional, third-person, objective 
capacities, computations, and behaviors.
WHAT IS A SELF? DEFINING 
“INDIVIDUALS”
“Of course there is no question that a tree or an elephant 
is one individual, and we have a very clear mental picture 
of what this means, for we ourselves are individuals. But 
there are lower forms in the borderland between 
one-celled organisms and multicellular organisms that 
are more bothersome in this respect.”
–J. T. Bonner, 1950
Neuroscientists (and philosophers of mind) have long wrestled 
with the question of how many can add up to one – a 
“conceptual self that is composed of interacting neural regions” 
with centralized agency and planning (Murray et  al., 2015). 
But this is not just a key question for neurobiology: as will 
be  seen below, important aspects of biomedicine also hinge 
on the ability to identify higher-order control structures composed 
of cells or pathways. Epistemology requires a subject (whoever 
it is that does or does not know something), and this is critical 
not only for human philosophers but also for many animals. 
Survival depends on evolving finely tuned agency detectors 
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
3 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
that allow them to parse their world into agents that pursue 
recognizable goals and can be interacted with in a way different 
than with their parts (Mar et  al., 2007).
Exobiologists may at some point be  confronted with the 
task of understanding what aspect of an alien ecosystem constitutes 
some sort of coherent biological Individual. This is likely to 
be  a very non-trivial task, as even life on Earth presents a 
significant challenge in the cases of metazoan microbiomes and 
colonial/symbiotic organisms (Daniels et al., 2016). In addition 
to evolved/natural Agents, the field of artificial intelligence has 
(or soon will) give rise to numerous constructs that may represent 
kinds of Selves. The goal then is not to attempt to draw a 
sharp line but to understand the factors that go into empirically 
useful ways to demarcate Individuals in a given context.
The question of defining an “organism” has been long 
discussed in biology (Huxley, 1852; Loeb, 1916, 1937; Sober, 
1991; Maynard Smith and Szathmáry, 1995; West et al., 2015). 
Much work has been done on defining compound Individuals, 
from perspectives of evolution (the forces which drive long-
term changes in the parts and how they relate), game theory 
(competition between and within the parts), thermodynamics 
and dissipative systems, systems theory, and even immunology 
(Prigogine, 1980; Rosen, 1985; Pradeu and Carosella, 2006; 
Strassmann and Queller, 2010; Pradeu, 2012, 2016; Godfrey-
Smith, 2016, 2017). Below, I  first present some background 
on aspects of flexible decision-making at different levels of 
biological organization and then argue for a definition based 
on information and goal-directedness (Walker et  al., 2016) 
A
B
FIGURE 1 | A continuum of cognitive powers. (A) A “TOTE” (test, operate, test, exit) loop schematizing a basic homeostatic cycle. This system’s unique 
architecture applies to many possible types of sensors and effectors at different scales of organization. By continuously taking action to minimize the distance 
(difference, error) between the current state of affairs and a set point describing a different (possible future) state of affairs, it enables a system to pursue goals 
despite perturbations from the outside world and intrinsic noise. Taken with permission from Pezzulo and Levin (2016). (B) This scale shows how different types of 
activity in systems can be ranked according to their degree of purposiveness. Many different types of cognition, from the simplest mechanisms to complex thought, 
illustrate that “cognitive system” is not a binary designation but rather a step on a continuum of computational capacity along which very diverse systems can 
be placed. Modified after Rosenblueth et al. (1943).
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
4 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
from a developmental biology perspective. I suggest candidates 
for proximate mechanisms that drive major transitions and 
provide a plausible evolutionary story of how primitive 
homeostasis leads to advanced agency (Man and Damasio, 
2019). This perspective is complementary to others, not 
incompatible with them. There is likely more than one useful 
definition of what constitutes a cognitive agent, in terms of 
making predictions and optimizing control policies for the 
origin and behavior of specific agents in various circumstances. 
As will be  seen below, the information-centered definition of 
the Self has specific advantages for dealing with nested (multi-
scale) structures observed in the biosphere and for understanding 
the shifting (not fixed) boundaries between Self and environment 
that can change within the timeline of a single individual (not 
only on evolutionary timescales).
BODY PATTERNING AND COGNITION:  
A COMMON ORIGIN
“Our life is shaped by our mind; we  become what 
we think.”
— Gautama Buddha
It is a well-known fact that the biosphere is a set of nesting 
dolls (Smythies, 2015). Eco-systems consist of groups that are 
comprised of organisms, which in turn are made of organs 
composed of tissues, which consist of cells made up of 
biochemical networks.
Remarkably, flexible and adaptive behavior is found at every 
level, which provides an important background for thinking 
about scale-invariant, essential features of Individuals in the 
broadest sense. Do integrated Selves only exist at the level of 
“organisms” (bodies), or could they arise and co-exist at multiple 
levels of organization and be recognized in novel contexts and 
implementations? In preparation for a proposed definition of 
Selves as goal-directed computational agents regardless of 
implementation, it is helpful to begin by considering novel 
embodiments of capacities usually associated with brains.
Single cells are composite agents that exhibit extremely rich 
patterning and behaviors and can be divided into even smaller 
independent units (such as cytoplast fragments with autonomous 
activity) because of their dynamic cytoskeletal and protein 
network subsystems (Novák and Bentrup, 1972; Albrecht-Buehler, 
1985; Ford, 2017; Siccardi and Adamatzky, 2017; Barvitenko 
et  al., 2018; Graham et  al., 2018). These capacities of cells 
presage their swarm behavior as metazoan organisms (Gregg, 
1959). Most features observed in the anatomical control of 
complex organisms, including differentiation (Sogabe et  al., 
2019), plasticity (Koch et  al., 2017), programmed cell death 
(Gordeeva et  al., 2004), regenerative repair (Morgan, 1901), 
and “neural” machinery (Tasneem et al., 2005; Liebeskind et al., 
2011; Burkhardt, 2015) already existed in ancient, unicellular 
life forms. Cells such as bacteria and yeast, as well as advanced 
plants, have been studied for their ability to compute and 
predict future events using patterns inferred from prior 
experiences (Saigusa et  al., 2008; Pezzulo and Castelfranchi, 
2009; Stepp, 2009; Shemesh et  al., 2010; Stepp and Turvey, 
2010; Mossbridge et  al., 2012; Dhar et  al., 2013; Goel and 
Mehta, 2013; Bohm et  al., 2016; De Berker et  al., 2016; Katz 
and Springer, 2016; Peters et  al., 2017; Wilson et  al., 2017; 
Gagliano et  al., 2018; Katz et  al., 2018). Such aneural systems 
have also been used to understand neural function (Koshland, 
1983; Morimoto and Koshland, 1991; Sarto-Jackson and Tomaska, 
2016). Thus, capacities usually assigned to Individuals with 
nervous systems, such as integrating spatio-temporal information, 
memory, and ability to pursue specific outcomes via selection 
from a number of possible behaviors evolved from far older 
pre-neural origins (Eisenstein, 1975; Boisseau et  al., 2016).
The emerging field known as “basal cognition” tracks the 
evolutionary history of learning and decision-making processes, 
beginning from the dynamic problem-solving capacities of 
cellular and subcellular forms (Lyon, 2006, 2015; Ginsburg 
et al., 2019). Many examples of memory, anticipation, context-
dependent decision-making, and learning are exhibited by 
organisms from yeast and bacteria to plants and somatic cells 
[reviewed in (Lyon, 2006, 2015; Baluška and Levin, 2016)]. 
This is even true of subcellular-level components, e.g., gene-
regulatory networks can execute similar learning and 
computational properties as neural networks, as can cytoskeletal 
networks, cell signaling pathways, reaction-diffusion chemistry, 
and metabolic networks (Watson et  al., 2010; Szabó et  al., 
2012; Stockwell et  al., 2015; Prentice-Mott et  al., 2016; Dent, 
2017; Stovold and O’Keefe, 2017; Barvitenko et  al., 2018; 
Gabalda-Sagarra et  al., 2018; Bulcha et  al., 2019). Single cells 
are very good at managing their morphology, behavior, and 
physiology as needed for survival, altering their motility, and 
metabolism in response to, and proactively in, changing 
environmental conditions. They succeed in exploiting their 
microenvironment toward optimal reproduction by selecting 
among numerous possible choices of gene expression patterns 
and behaviors. While the mechanisms by which unicellular 
organisms’ ability to accomplish specific adaptive ends is 
harnessed toward cooperative multicellularity is still poorly 
understood, one thing is clear: somatic cells did not lose their 
behavioral plasticity and computational capabilities in becoming 
part of metazoan swarms (bodies): they scaled them to enable 
pursuit of larger goals consisting of creation and upkeep of 
massively complex anatomies (Pezzulo and Levin, 2015).
Metazoan embryos are possible because the progeny of a 
fertilized egg cell can cooperate to create an invariant, large, 
complex anatomical structure with very high fidelity. Crucially, 
this is not simply an emergent result of hardwired processes 
but a very plastic, context-dependent system that achieves 
invariant patterning outcomes in an uncertain world. Regulative 
development (e.g., the two normal bodies resulting when an 
early embryo is cut in half) reveals that cellular swarms are 
able to achieve the same desired end-state (a species-specific 
target morphology) despite drastic perturbations and highly 
unexpected starting states. For example, when tadpoles are 
perturbed in the laboratory such that their craniofacial organs 
are in abnormal positions, they still make largely normal frog 
faces because eyes, jaws, and other structures move around in 
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
5 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
un-natural paths and only stop when a “correct frog face 
configuration” is reached (Vandenberg et  al., 2012; Pinet and 
McLaughlin, 2019). Similarly, salamander tails grafted to the 
flank slowly remodel into limbs – a structure more compatible 
with the large-scale anatomical spec of a salamander (Farinella-
Ferruzza, 1956). Many animals, such as axolotls, are able to 
regenerate whole limbs, no matter where they are amputated, 
and other organs; a key aspect is that the new appendages 
grow until the precisely correct structures are made – no more 
and no less. Developing kidneys will form tubules of the same 
diameter, whether by cell-cell communication of ~10 cells per 
cross-section in normal settings or by cytoskeletal bending of 
single cells around themselves when cell size is artificially 
increased drastically, revealing the ability of the system to harness 
diverse molecular mechanisms toward the same anatomical 
outcome (Fankhauser, 1945). These are but a few of the ubiquitous 
examples of remodeling toward an invariant end. They reveal 
the ability of somatic cells to not only pursue specific target 
morphologies despite perturbations and novel scenarios, but to 
pursue collective patterning outcomes that are truly enormous 
with respect to the scale of size and organization of single 
cells: the length of a limb or the configuration of a face are 
simply not defined at the level of single cells – the set points 
of pattern-homeostatic mechanisms implemented by a cellular 
collective are large, organ-level macrostates.
Also important to the understanding of compound biological 
individuals is the ability of cells to make decisions as a single 
coherent unit. For example, in early embryos, regions on the 
left and right sides of the midline need to express left- or 
right-specific genes in order to establish invariant laterality 
of the heart and visceral organs. Experimental interference 
with a number of physiological mechanisms upstream of 
asymmetric gene expression is sufficient to randomize this 
normally invariant pattern, producing duplicated (LL or RR) 
or reversed (RL) patterns. Remarkably, however, this 
randomization is made on a group level – in each case, the 
entire domain randomly picks L or R identity, not exhibiting 
a speckled appearance where each cell adopts a stochastic 
outcome. The decision is random, but all of the cells in the 
domain are coordinated to make the same random decision 
(Levin et  al., 2002). This is likewise seen in the conversion 
of normal frog pigment cells to melanoma – the decision to 
convert is stochastic across a population of animals, but it is 
made by all of the melanocytes within a body acting as a 
single coherent deciding unit (Lobikin et al., 2015). The ability 
of cells to join into domains that execute group decisions, 
whether deterministic or stochastic, is an essential component 
of the evolution of complex forms and will be  a central 
component of a proposed definition of a Self.
The empirical utility of pursuing metaphors based on the 
parallels between adaptive whole organism behavior and the 
plasticity of cellular activity during construction and repair 
of a body is discussed in detail elsewhere (Pezzulo and Levin, 
2015). However, for the proposed view of agency described 
below, and for thinking about its evolutionary origin, it is 
important to realize that the parallels between goal-directed 
behaviors and morphogenesis are not only functional but 
reflect deep conservation of molecular mechanisms. Neural 
networks control the movement of a body in three-dimensional 
space; this scheme may be  an evolutionary exaptation and 
speed-optimization of a more ancient, slower role of bioelectrical 
signaling: the movement of body configuration through 
anatomical morphospace during embryogenesis, repair, and 
remodeling (Sullivan et  al., 2016; Mathews and Levin, 2018; 
Mclaughlin and Levin, 2018). This is an expansion of previous 
proposals of minimal cognition as sensorimotor coordination 
(Van Duijn et  al., 2006), to include cell behavior during 
morphogenesis as a kind of sensorimotor activity of a 
patterning Agent.
Developmental bioelectricity is the ubiquitous exchange of 
slowly changing ion-based voltage signals within and among 
cells (Funk, 2013; Levin and Martyniuk, 2018). All cells are 
electrically active, and modern neurons evolved from pre-neural 
precursors that were already reaping the benefits of ionic 
signaling for computation. How ancient are these mechanisms – 
how early was bioelectric coordination exploited by evolution? 
Bioelectric dynamics, already used for coordination within 
bacterial biofilms (Prindle et al., 2015), also enable embryonic 
tissues to implement robust growth and morphogenesis (Bates, 
2015), as well as by unicellular organisms to coordinate behavior 
(Van Houten, 1979). Recent advances in developmental 
bioelectricity have shown how endogenous dynamics of resting 
potential changes modify transcriptional cascades and thereby 
instruct axial patterning, organ determination, and size control, 
as well as guiding the behavior of individual cells (Sundelacruz 
et  al., 2009; Levin, 2014; Levin and Martyniuk, 2018). It is 
thus not surprising that drugs that modify traditional cognitive 
capacities can be strong teratogens (Hernandez-Diaz and Levin, 
2014), while anesthetics reduce and modify regenerative capacity 
(Buchanan, 1922; Tseng et  al., 2010). We  have previously 
argued that the deep evolutionary conservation of ion channel 
and neurotransmitter mechanisms highlights a fundamental 
isomorphism between developmental and behavioral processes. 
Consistent with this, membrane excitability has been suggested 
to be  the ancestral basis for psychology (Grossberg, 1978; 
Cook et  al., 2014; Pezzulo and Levin, 2015). Thus, it is likely 
that the cognitive capacities of advanced brains lie on a 
continuum with, and evolve from, much simpler computational 
processes that are widely conserved at both the functional 
and mechanism (molecular) levels. The information processing 
and spatio-temporal integration needed to construct and 
regenerate complex bodies arises from the capabilities of single 
cells, which evolution exapted and scaled up as behavioral 
repertoires of complex nervous systems that underlie familiar 
examples of Selves. An appreciation of these aspects of 
developmental biology blurs the distinction between mind and 
body – a direction already being explored in the field of soft 
body robotics (Pfeifer et al., 2007a,b; Pfeifer and Gomez, 2009), 
which expands the possibilities for defining new kinds of 
Selves. A computational perspective on the task of building 
specific complex anatomies suggests interesting new ways to 
think about how an integrated Self can be  formed and how 
its boundaries are maintained or altered during its lifetime 
and within evolutionary timescales.
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
6 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
MULTICELLULARITY VS. CANCER: THE 
SHIFTING BOUNDARY OF THE SELF
The communication that enables cells to join into collectives 
that make decisions about the growth and form of organ-level 
structures (i.e., what to sculpt and when to stop) can go awry, 
resulting in cancer (Chernet and Levin, 2013a; Moore et  al., 
2017). 
Despite 
highly 
diverse 
molecular 
and 
clinical 
manifestations, one common aspect points to the key: in 
carcinogenic transformation (Yamasaki et  al., 1995; Ruch and 
Trosko, 2001), cells become isolated from the physiological 
signals that bind them into unified networks (the essential 
role of bioelectricity in this process is discussed in the next 
section). In the absence of global cues, they revert to their 
unicellular past, when their behaviors were aimed at optimizing 
the future of just one cell: proliferate as much as possible, 
and travel to whatever location affords the best local environment 
for nutrients and expansion (Davies and Lineweaver, 2011; 
Bussey et  al., 2017; Zhou et  al., 2018a). This is a breakdown 
of multicellularity and highlights the fact that the scale of the 
structure which cells work to maintain can change rapidly –  
from cooperation toward an entire organ system or body to 
the level of a single cell.
Normal bodies consist of networks of cells working together 
toward a unified goal  - create and maintain specific large 
structures. In an important sense, each cell is integrated, via 
physiological signaling, into a coherent swarm intelligence with 
system-level (anatomical) goals. In cancer, the scope of the 
coherent Self of a cell reduces from being as large as the 
boundary of a whole body, to that of just one cell’s surface. 
The scope of the Self – the structure which a cell works to 
maintain and support – shrinks drastically in two main ways. 
First, it shrinks spatially: being electrically isolated from 
their neighbors by a shutdown of gap junction synapses, a 
cell can neither measure distant events nor communicate across 
anatomical distances with other cells and with the outside 
world (Kull, 2000; Ay and Lohr, 2015). All of the attention 
(in terms of measurement and activity toward scaled goals) 
is focused at the single cell level, while the rest of the body 
is treated as the “external environment” (and all living things 
exploit their environment for their own benefit). Thus, the 
boundary between self and non-self (David Krakauer et  al., 
2014) can shift: multicellularity enlarges it, while carcinogenesis 
reduces it, and it is readily seen how this shifts the behavior 
of cells toward a mode that is not beneficial for the organism level.
Moreover, the size of the Self shrinks temporally: the time 
horizon of activity shifts from decades (somatic cells execute 
regenerative and repair processes that maintain a body up to 
~100  years) to a much shorter time frame, as cancer cells 
undertake activity which may kill the host (and themselves) 
within a mere year. Normal cells pursue goals (organ maintenance) 
that can be much longer than a cell’s individual lifespan, especially 
in tissues with rapid cellular turnover – the time scale for 
such homeostatic activity is one that belongs to the collective, 
not the cells themselves. Shrinking their Self reduces the ability 
to work toward temporally distant goals (reduces their temporal 
horizon of concern) and, together with the inability to 
communicate as part of a distributed electrical network, makes 
them literally short-sighted – undertaking activity that will 
result in death of themselves as well as of the organism (except 
in the very rare cases of transmissible tumors). This view predicts 
that interference with (or restoration of) physiological 
communication among cells should be  able to trigger (or 
suppress) cancer and that the relevant parameter (communication) 
is spread out over considerable distance and not confined to 
single cells (e.g., genomic damage). The general fact that actively 
patterning (embryonic and regenerative) environments can 
reprogram cancer cells to normal histogenesis has been known 
for decades (Illmensee and Mintz, 1976; Kasemeier-Kulesa et al., 
2008; Oviedo and Beane, 2009). However, the specific prediction 
of a role of real-time bioelectric communication in cancer has 
been confirmed in vivo in recent experiments: metastatic 
transformation of normal melanocytes can be  achieved in 
genetically normal tadpoles simply by depolarizing a specific 
cell population (Lobikin et  al., 2012), while, conversely,  
human oncogenes which normally induce tumors can 
be prevented from doing so simply by optogenetic or constitutive 
hyperpolarization 
(Chernet 
and 
Levin, 
2013b, 
2014;  
Chernet et  al., 2015, 2016).
One important aspect should be  stressed, in connection 
with the classic evolutionary concept of “selfishness” (Werren, 
2011; Kourilsky, 2012): on the above-mentioned view, the cells 
in a metazoan organism body are not less selfish than unicellular 
organisms or cancer cells. They are equally selfish, working 
only for the benefit of themselves, but the relevant self that 
they defend is bigger in terms of space, time, and complexity. 
As will be argued below, what defines this Self is the boundary 
of information being able to pass between the subunits. It 
should be  noted that this change is not binary and can occur 
at intermediate levels, e.g., teratoma tumors have coherent 
differentiated tissues (teeth, hair, skin, and muscle) but are 
not functional embryos, illustrating a level of integrated 
organization between that of cells and whole organs. It is an 
essential aspect of Scale-Free Cognition that most biological 
systems consist of multiple, nested selves [not one, as implied 
by Integrated Information Theory (Tononi, 2008)]. Each inner 
agent maintains its own local Self only to the extent that it 
regulates (restricts) information flow from neighbors and thus 
establishes unique states that do not coincide with those of 
the collective. Evolutionary and game-like dynamics occur 
within and between each level of organization, via cooperation 
and competition. While competition between cells in a body 
is only now beginning to be  characterized in molecular detail 
(Gogna et  al., 2015), the remarkable fact that different 
substructures in an otherwise unified organism do not all 
have the same goals and can work at cross-purposes was 
realized already at the very dawn of developmental biology 
by Roux, who presciently wrote of the struggle of the parts 
in an embryo (Heams, 2012).
Some biologists model cancer cells as individuals, while 
some see a tumor as its own organ (Egeblad et  al., 2010), 
which can take over other cell types (Gabrilovich, 2017) in 
the same way that embryonic instructor cells control others 
in normal development (Vieira and McCusker, 2019). These 
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
7 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
possibilities could now be  distinguished experimentally and 
analytically using advances in information theory that enable 
rigorous comparison of the causal power of models at different 
levels of description (Hoel et  al., 2013, 2016; Moore et  al., 
2017). Identifying the most efficacious level of organization in 
a given system is critical for selecting targets in biomedical 
or engineering approaches to understand and control it. Is 
the best strategy chemotherapy, which seeks to identify and 
destroy irrevocably broken cells, or could there be normalization 
strategies that re-connect cells into a collective? The latter is 
a tantalizing possibility, as it has long been known that embryonic 
or regenerative environments can reprogram tumors in situ 
(Mintz and Illmensee, 1975; Kulesa et  al., 2006). Motivating 
a system with inputs and experiences at the appropriate level 
is always easier than attempting to rewire complex systems 
with emergent dynamics in attempts to micromanage specific 
global outcomes. Understanding the decision-making, not only 
the molecular mechanisms, is essential and is perhaps one 
path toward resolving the unsatisfactory state of cancer medicine 
(Soto and Sonnenschein, 2013; Sonnenschein and Soto, 2015). 
Similar approaches are being taken with respect to swarms of 
insects, robots, and human beings (Couzin, 2009; Deisboeck 
and Couzin, 2009; Gomes et al., 2013; Rubenstein et al., 2014).
The ability of subunits to enter into a communication network 
with variable scale of boundaries is already being recognized 
in swarm dynamics, where the termite nest “superorganism is 
marked by a kind of extended physiology”, which supports 
regenerative repair (taking the large termite nest as the “body”), 
a kind of swarm cancer, and primitive cognition functions 
such as hypothesis testing carried out by the swarm during 
the repair process (Beekman and Oldroyd, 2008; Turner, 2016). 
As will be  seen in the next section, this continuum between 
somatic pattern and cognitive systems reflects a deep scale 
invariance of cognitive concepts that apply as much to societies 
of cells as of societies of animals (Seeley, 2009; Turner, 2011). 
The view of the extent of active information as central to 
demarcating what exactly constitutes an Individual Self in a 
given context, especially the focus on a set of level-specific 
goal states that a system is able to pursue, suggests a formalism 
for identifying, categorizing, and comparing highly diverse types 
of Individuals.
DEFINING INDIVIDUATION FROM A 
COGNITIVE PERSPECTIVE
“By the term “mind,” I mean ideas and purposes.”
–McCulloch, 1951
I propose a definition of an Individual based on its 
information-processing structure (Barandiaran et al., 2009): the 
scale and types of goals that a system can pursue defines 
(determines) the boundaries and content of the putative “agent.” 
On this view, what defines a coherent, unified Self out of its 
constituent components and the surrounding environment is 
the set of parts that operate toward reaching specific goal 
states. Like a theorem, which has a holistic nature not shared 
by any of the axioms alone, a functional individual is more 
than the sum of its parts in the sense that goal-directed capacity 
emerges only from the integrated activity of all of the components 
(Weiss, 1967). This flows naturally from the conception of a 
goal-seeking system: having specified goal state(s), it is 
immediately clear than there must be  an integrated system 
that can perform all of the parts of the Test-Operate-Test 
cycle, which may be  invisible by inspecting each of the 
components in micro detail. This definition is orthogonal to 
other definitions, e.g., evolutionary or genetic ones, but having 
bigger goals (such as organ morphogenesis instead of single-
cell proliferation) de-Darwinises cells and Darwinises groups, 
shifting the locus of selection and competition (Michod, 2007; 
Godfrey-Smith, 2009). I  propose a working definition for the 
degree to which a system is a coherent Self, in terms of the 
goals (in the cybernetic sense) that the system seeks to achieve. 
Thus, a system’s ability to operate toward specific counterfactuals 
(future states that are not true right now but can be  brought 
about through specific actions) is central to defining, 
understanding, and communicating with an arbitrary Individual, 
which might consist of many levels of organized components.
Complex cognitive systems can have very large and multifaceted 
goals, and this arises through evolutionary and ontogenetic 
scale-up and elaboration of primitive goals that arose from 
constraints of thermodynamics and homeostasis. The initial, 
most primitive feature of a living system is preferences –  
the fact that some states of the world are better for its welfare 
than others. This enables learning from positive and negative 
reinforcement, which leads to an explosion of computational 
and behavioral capabilities. Preferences evolve into goals to 
the extent that a system grows in complexity and causal power 
and becomes able to act in the world in ways that are likely 
to move it toward preferred regions of its state space (initially, 
focused on simple metabolic survival, but ranging all the 
way to complex human psychological needs and perhaps 
beyond). It is likely that any life we  observe today (which 
has passed the filter of selection) has preferences and is good 
at optimizing for them (making this criterion a useful part 
of the very definition of life), but it is possible that our 
initial efforts at artificial life may construct some truly primitive, 
transitional cases that can maintain a degree of coherence 
in a sheltered laboratory environment without an efficient 
goal-seeking capacity.
A very simple organism can only have preferences about 
what is occurring at the current time, in its immediate 
environment. A more complex organism whose causal structure 
enables associative learning can pursue or avoid stimuli that 
are several steps removed in space, time, and causal connection 
from whatever it is choosing among. This kind of learning 
enables associations between stimuli that impinge on very 
different sensors in different parts of the organism and leads 
to behavioral preferences about stimuli that are in themselves 
neutral (do not cause damage or provide immediate reward) 
but are linked to future positive and negative outcomes by 
past experience (indirect causal connections stretching across 
body distance and life history).
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
8 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
Others have already made the link between associative learning 
and the emergence of self (Ginsburg et  al., 2019). Very complex 
selves can have preferences about abstract states that are very far 
away indeed (such as human beings who are genuinely troubled 
by the ultimate fate of our star and are actively working toward 
long-distance space travel and the fate of humanity as a whole). 
However, the spectrum of Selves is not a simple linear one because 
of the very wide range of possible natural and artificial agents 
we  do (and will increasingly) encounter. The biological world 
offers numerous corner cases of swarm individuals, but a good 
conceptual framework will also include organic artificial life, 
engineered (computer-based) artificial intelligences, and potential 
exobiological discoveries. Can highly diverse Selves, with very 
different material structures be compared with each other in any 
meaningful way? I  suggest that a universal rubric, applicable 
regardless of the physical implementation, can be  defined by 
focusing on the information processing and goal-directed activity 
of any given system.
The cognitive boundary of an Individual [a “Center of Concern” 
(Murase and Asakura, 2003)] is the most distant (in time and 
space) set of events that this system can measure and attempts 
to regulate in its goal-directed activity. It is a surface indicating 
what things this system can possibly care about (conversely, it 
defines preferences as the spatio-temporal domain of states that 
serve as inputs and outputs to the system). In advanced agents, 
it is also the boundary of the self-model. A range of such systems 
is illustrated in Figure  2: using one axis for time and one axis 
to represent three dimensions of space enables a semi-quantitative 
representation within which individuals of very variable cognitive 
capacity can be  plotted in the same virtual space. Recent work 
in artificial life has already begun to characterize the cognitive 
domains of very diverse kinds of complex systems (Beer, 2014).
The edges of a given Agent’s goal space define a sort of 
“computational light cone” – the boundaries beyond which its 
cognitive system cannot operate. For example, a tick has a relatively 
small cognitive boundary, having very little memory or predictive 
power in the temporal direction, and sensing/acting very locally. 
A dog has much more temporal memory, some forward prediction 
ability, and a degree of spatial concern. However, it is likely 
impossible for a dog’s cognitive apparatus to operate with notions 
about what is going to happen next month or in the adjacent 
town. Human minds can operate over goals of vastly greater spatial 
and temporal scales, and one can readily imagine artificial (organic 
or software-based) Selves with properties that define every possible 
shape in this space (and perhaps change their boundaries over 
evolutionary and individual timescales). As will be  seen in the 
next section, expanding the horizon is what enables information 
(in the Shannon sense) to acquire meaning, because data become 
causally linked to distant and past experiences, and acquires 
implications for future expectations. The formalism also suggests 
semi-quantitative definitions of maximum cognitive rate (the speed 
at which information propagates across an agent’s body); this and 
other similarities to the space-time diagrams of Relativity remain 
to be  explored.
Clearly, much more work is needed to fully flesh out this 
rubric in a way that makes it immediately applicable in ethology, 
AI, and artificial life. One implication of this view is that there 
is not necessarily one unique primary level of organization; 
rather, Individuals existing at different levels in a given system 
can be  putatively revealed by experiment and analysis that 
identifies allostatic set points  - the goals of systems defined at 
different levels of organization and the spatio-temporal boundaries 
of measurements and actions taken by such mechanisms at 
each level. It is of course non-trivial empirical work to ascertain  
goals, especially for novel or alien ones. Moreover, systems and 
subsystems will have different, overlapping, and not always 
aligned goals. Thus, another key implication is that systems 
house multiple levels of coexisting coherent Selves.
Presumably, the volume of possible cognitive light cones keeps 
expanding with evolutionary time (although some lineages can 
contract it, permanently or during specific ontogenetic life stages). 
Over evolutionary scales, there have been “inflationary leaps” – 
innovations in body structure which drastically increase the cognitive 
boundary of viable selves. The formalism places no upper bound 
on the size of the cognitive light cone. Thus, while we understand 
“diminished capacity” for human beings in a legal and psychological 
setting, it is important to also consider “increased capacity”: what 
would a being with a much larger cognitive boundary than a 
typical Homo sapiens be like? It is interesting to consider whether 
this is the sort of outcome envisaged in classical traditions that 
posited evolution of human consciousness to a state of “Buddha-
hood” – a cognitive boundary so large that such an individual 
would be capable of, for example, being directly concerned about 
the individual welfare of a myriad of beings. It is likely that efforts 
in artificial life, biomedical enhancement, or engineered AI will 
eventually give rise to much larger Selves, since it is unlikely that 
today’s human cognitive sphere is the maximum possible one.
Next, we consider a possible sequence of evolutionary scenario 
for the expansion of cognitive boundaries.
THE AGENT’S EVOLUTIONARY BACK-
STORY: SCALING OF INFORMATION BY 
BIOELECTRICITY
What evolutionary pressures lead cognitive boundaries to expand, 
resulting in the variety of agents observed in the biosphere? A 
sequence of phases can be hypothesized (setting aside the abiotic 
origin of chemical systems with feedback). I  propose that the 
“atom” of this cognitive hierarchy is homeostasis (Bernard, 1865; 
Cannon, 1932; Wiener, 1961; Man and Damasio, 2019). The 
ancient origin of living forms is predicated on the ability of some 
simple systems to achieve coherence and distinction from the 
external environment, against perturbations, maintaining spatial 
and metabolic integrity by ensuring certain parameters stay in 
specific ranges (Maturana and Varela, 1980; Luisi, 2014). This 
homeostatic persistence is the origin of cognitive goals  – the 
setpoints of subcellular biochemical circuits that react to 
perturbations in a way that maintains parameter range are the 
first, tiny examples of integrated goal-seeking systems. Homeostatic 
setpoints (actually, ensembles and not single points) are encoded 
by biophysical properties that guide activity toward implementing 
those states. The ability to operate toward a region in state space 
may be  the primitive origin of complex cognitive systems that 
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
9 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
can entertain counterfactuals (remember or anticipate events that 
are not occurring right now).
Minimization of anti-homeostatic stress is a powerful driver, 
already suggested to be  an important factor in evolutionary 
innovation (Erkenbrack et al., 2018; Miller et al., 2018; Wagner 
et  al., 2019). A second step to the simplest homeostatic loop 
is the inclusion of a richer set of “hidden layers” (in the 
neural network sense) - additional biochemical nodes between 
the sensors and effectors of a given system that enable a degree 
of memory. By introducing a delay between inputs and outputs 
(Flack, 2012, 2017) and by including additional feedback loops 
that can maintain state after transient stimuli, a much more 
powerful homeostatic circuit is created, which uses memory 
of past events to anticipate, not merely react to, environmental 
challenges. The molecular basis of such anticipatory circuits, 
and biochemical machinery that responds to different frequencies 
in signals, has been described in single cells, such as ERK 
signaling dynamics and metabolic networks (Toettcher et  al., 
2013; Bugaj et  al., 2018; Katz, 2018). Chemotaxis, such as 
seen in bacteria, is an early example of this because it exploits 
time delays in environmental sensing as a kind of memory 
to enable prediction/anticipation that enables it to optimize 
travel up nutrient gradients (Vladimirov and Sourjik, 2009; 
Scherber et  al., 2012). The earliest forms of such memory are 
direct and not representational, e.g., slime molds learn to cross 
salt bridges to get rewards by storing the salt itself in their 
bodies as the engram of the memory used to guide future 
decisions (Vogel and Dussutour, 2016; Boussard et  al., 2019).
A
B
C
FIGURE 2 | Arbitrary cognitive “Individuals” can be classified according to their computational boundary. (A) Each living system has a delimited “area of concern” – a 
region of space-time, with the organism at its center, within which its cognitive apparatus functions to take measurements and act. The borders of its cognition are 
schematized on a semi-quantitative state space defined as follows. The vertical axis is time. Values below the individual’s Now are past events, of which it may have a 
memory extending some duration in the past; values above the Now are future events, which it may be able to predict or anticipate to some distance in the future. The 
horizontal axis represents three dimensions of space. Each individual, based on its sensory and effector apparatus, and the complexity and organization of information-
processing unit layers between them, can measure and attempt to modify conditions within some distance of itself. (B) The size and shape of this cognitive boundary 
defines the sophistication of the agent and determines the scale of its goal directedness. This scheme enables multiple agents, regardless of their composition/structure 
or origin (evolved, engineered) to be directly plotted on the same space. The shape of boundary defines each agent’s “cognitive light cone” – anything outside this 
region is mentally inaccessible to that system. Here are illustrated a few representative life forms. Primitive agents such as ticks may only have a very small area within 
which they can sense signals and operate – immediately next to them, and without much memory or ability to anticipate future events. Dogs have significant memory, 
but very limited ability to plan for the future and can only really care about events in their local vicinity (it is not possible to get a dog to care about what will happen 
several miles away, or in 2 weeks). Humans exhibit a great diversity of cognitive boundary shapes but on average have a memory that lasts ~102 years, can anticipate 
decades into the future, and often plan and act to attempt to modify events on quite distant spatial scales (sometimes planetary or even beyond). A variety of as-yet 
unknown alien, engineered, and bio-synthetic life forms could occupy every conceivable corner of this option space. (C) In this scheme, Individuals can overlap –  
the same biophysical system can support a number of coexisting, coupled Selves with different cognitive borders. A coordinated swarm of animals, the individual 
animals themselves, their organs, their cells, and even the metabolic and transcriptional networks inside the cells each have their own cognitive horizon. They 
cooperate or compete based on specific circumstances and each can be addressed semi-independently because of the differential goals they pursue (and thus, the 
different positive and negative reinforcements that can be brought to bear to modify events at a given level). All panels courtesy of Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative.
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
10 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
More advanced creatures possess richer networks that allow 
complex forms of learning in which memories and goal states 
are implemented by settings (configurations) of internal mechanism 
several biochemical steps removed from the actual state in question 
(perhaps the origin of symbolic representation in more complex 
minds). Reactive homeostasis evolves into predictive allostasis 
(Schulkin and Sterling, 2019), under the pressure to predict signals 
from environment and other elements of the biosphere (Seoane 
and Sole, 2018). Importantly, memory can serve as the beginning 
of modularity because learning essentially groups diverse stimuli 
into compressed representations: complex states of affairs become 
remembered as compact biophysical engrams – this is the essence 
of the kind of modularity when a simple biophysical event kicks 
off the formation of a complex morphogenetic cascade such as 
building a “hand” in embryogenesis. In associative learning, some 
complex state gets functionally “hooked” to a trigger stimulus; 
this stimulus may be  much simpler (in terms of information 
content) than the state it represents or the activity that it will 
kick-start. In somatic control networks, this is implemented as 
developmental modules – complex downstream morphogenetic 
activities that are initiated by a single driver. It has often been 
noted that modularity confers benefits for evolvability (Schlosser 
and Wagner, 2004; Wagner et  al., 2007), but it is not always 
appreciated that like many other key aspects described above, 
it has an origin continuous with (and is driven by) control and 
proto-cognitive capabilities of the simplest living agents. The 
recent discovery that very simple bioelectric states can trigger 
complex organ formation, such as induction of complete eyes 
in various parts of the animal (Pai et  al., 2012), are consistent 
with a primary role of bioelectric signaling in both learning and 
morphogenetic control mechanisms (Levin, 2012).
The sensory machinery, implementing inputs to the cognitive 
agent, is extremely ancient. Complex animals’ sense of touch, 
taste, temperature, hearing, etc. are mediated by the exact same 
ion channel mechanisms that were already discovered by bacteria 
and used to make sense of their world (Tasneem et  al., 2005; 
Blackwell, 2006; Liebeskind et al., 2012; Nilius and Honore, 2012). 
A rich sensory input layer, consisting of receptors and channels 
on a cell’s membrane enables the dynamics of Active Inference 
to operate (Friston et al., 2012; Pezzulo et al., 2015), and is itself 
highly regulated by cellular transcription and translational machinery 
in accordance with the main tenet of Perceptual Control Theory: 
behavior is the control of perception (Powers, 1973). Systems 
minimize surprise and optimize variational free energy by tuning 
their internal states in a way that optimally predicts future stimuli 
(Friston and Ao, 2012; Friston, 2013; Badcock et  al., 2019). This 
is as true for nervous systems as it is for individual cells during 
metazoan development (Friston et al., 2015; Ramstead et al., 2019). 
This kind of predictive coding is data compression – a mechanism 
that works to represent a long history of environmental inputs 
into a compact representation via tuning of internal states. This 
basic learning and inference capability is the primal origin of 
“understanding” and intelligence in advanced brains, which can 
be  defined as the process of inferring patterns from raw data 
and making “maps” of regularities in observations that occupies 
every Self from the simplest of organisms to the scientist working 
on extracting deep theory from data (Dingle et  al., 2018).
The advent of multicellularity has been proposed to result 
from the drive to minimize surprise: a cell need only to surround 
itself with its progeny, in order to ensure a much more predictable 
milieu (the least surprising object in the world is a copy of 
yourself) (Fields and Levin, 2019). If these “front line infantry” 
are kept in place and suppressed from proliferating (and 
differentiated), one immediately gets the kind of arrangement 
seen across biology, from stem cell/soma systems to queen/worker 
dynamics in insect colonies. The surrounding body becomes an 
informational shield (Markov blanket) for the stem cell (Friston, 
2013); adding epithelial and mesenchymal cell layers enables a 
kind of neural-like network in which each layer provides an 
increased level of abstraction from environmental stimuli, enabling 
deep tissues to perceive not simply raw signals but highly processed, 
dimensionally-reduced, compressed data that form a kind of 
primitive “knowledge” about the outside world’s patterns.
This transition from single cell state to multicellular tissue 
is a crucial step in the expansion of the cognitive boundary 
and the creation of more complex agents with larger goals 
(Figures  3, 4). By receiving information from neighbors, a 
cell in the center of a tissue can get (filtered) data about 
events occurring at a considerable distance. Because of the 
finite spread of signals through tissue and the predictive 
capacities of networks, this expands the cognitive horizon of 
a cell in both space and time. Crucially, by organizing into 
a (partial) electrochemical and informational pool or syncytium, 
all of the cells are able to measure and detect events occurring 
within the same boundary, creating a larger individual that 
emerges from the collective. The new Individual is an integrated 
whole because its subunits are no longer exclusively have their 
own local, distinct microenvironments (and thus internal 
models of the world) but are constrained to share a bigger, 
common reality due to the spread of information and influence 
among them. Such collective individuals can have a higher 
problem-solving capacity than their members, because they 
can support a layered architecture with experience-dependent 
communication channels (synapses, broadly defined), emergence 
of “virtual governors” with beneficial properties with respect 
to control capacity (Dewan, 1976), and more complex state 
space with more attractors and thus can compute meta-system 
properties not accessible to the single agents (Hofstadter, 1979; 
Crutchfield et  al., 1998; Cenek, 2011).
It 
is 
proposed 
that 
morphological 
complexity 
and 
multicellularity are driven by greedy infotaxis (Vergassola et al., 
2007) – collecting as much information as possible, from as 
far away (in both space and time) as possible, to minimize 
surprise and optimize prediction. The more a cell is connected 
to other cells in networks, the more processing capacity and 
the bigger the horizon of what the compound individual can 
potentially sense, remember, and store (Crutchfield et al., 1998). 
Merging into communicating networks also enables more noise 
tolerance and robustness – the field of artificial neural networks 
exploits the fact that some kinds of networks facilitate extracting 
patterns from data and can ignore irrelevant details while picking 
up on salient patterns. Inevitably, the scope of the Self expands 
with this integrated, growing cognitive domain. What molecular 
mechanisms might underlie this in cellular systems?
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
11 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
A fundamental facilitating step in this process is provided 
by developmental bioelectricity: the exchange of ionic signals 
within and among cells to propagate instructive influence at 
multiple scales of organization (Levin, 2012). Electric circuits 
are very convenient for processing information (a fact that 
has not escaped the attention of computer engineers and 
evolutionary mechanisms of neural systems), because they 
facilitate integration of information over spatial domains, and 
form feedback loops (such as voltage-gated ion channels) that 
readily implement memories and homeostats (Pietak and Levin, 
2017; Cervera et al., 2018). This proposal, of ancient bioelectrical 
systems of coordination at the dawn of multicellularity, has 
now been confirmed by elegant studies of brain-like integration 
of spatial information by ion flows in the proto-bodies known 
as bacterial biofilms, which show how group-scale goals can 
emerge in simple physiological systems (e.g., nutrient sharing 
in the bacterial collective) (Prindle et  al., 2015; Humphries 
et  al., 2017; Lee et  al., 2017). In more advanced cell types, 
this same scheme is implemented not by extracellular ionic 
waves but by intracellular electrical synapses known as gap 
junctions – highly regulatable valves that allow cells to selectively 
share bioelectric state with neighbors and implement activity-
dependent plasticity (memory) (Palacios-Prado and Bukauskas, 
2009; Zeng et  al., 2009; Mathews and Levin, 2017).
Individual cells will all measure local conditions at their cell 
surface. When coupled into networks via gap junctions however, 
the whole collective can measure and act upon the same sensory 
data – the Umwelt expands to create a larger individual in which 
the comprising cells share a unifying picture of the world (Figure 4). 
It is thus no coincidence that most anesthetics used to remove 
cognition and sensory experience, whether in plants or animals, 
are gap junctional (bioelectric) uncouplers (Mantz et  al., 1993; 
Wentlandt et  al., 2006; Liu et  al., 2012; Gremiaux et  al., 2014; 
Baluska et al., 2016). Thus, physiological connectivity is the binding 
mechanism responsible for the appearance of larger unified Selves. 
The coordination of cells toward a single goal (body patterning) 
is now known to be in part controlled by the activity of bioelectric 
networks mediated by gap junctions (Levin et al., 2017; Mathews 
and Levin, 2018; Mclaughlin and Levin, 2018; Pietak and Levin, 
2018). Consistent with the isomorphism between patterning control 
and behavioral control, the same scale-up occurs in morphogenesis: 
subcellular chirality that determines morphology of single-cell 
A
B
FIGURE 3 | Scale-up of cognition. This schematization uses the example of single cells vs. a gap-junctionally coupled tissue, but the same basic system is 
applicable to many scales and many types of agents, both engineered and evolved. (A) A single small agent, like a cell, has limited spatial and temporal perception. 
It is able to infer, store, and operate with respect to a small subset of the patterns existing in its environment (symbolized by the single pink puzzle piece). (B) Joining 
into communicating networks allows each cell to have (self-regulated and temporally delayed) access to the information obtained by neighboring cells, as well as to 
form layered architectures with progressive layers abstracting patterns from raw data. In this way, the subunits not only expand their spatial range of perception but 
also can improve memory and a degree of predictive ability. The resulting larger Individual is formed with a cognitive world that is unified by the cells’ sharing of 
information across time and space. All panels courtesy of Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative Inc.
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
12 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
organisms is amplified during early development by a system of 
gap junctions and ion channel-driven bioelectrical cues into animal-
wide axial patterning (the appearance of a new anatomical level – 
“whole body symmetry”) (Levin, 2003, 2006).
The developmental control bioelectric network shares 
mechanistic evolutionary history with the nervous system, and 
the conservation extends not only to mechanisms of targeting 
connections [such as neural-like mechanisms deployed in plant 
pollen tubes (Palanivelu and Preuss, 2000)] but to the ubiquitous 
use of neurotransmitter molecules downstream of bioelectric 
driving forces [e.g., GABA and the serotonin-like Auxin used 
in many plants (Ramesh et  al., 2015)]. An intermediate form 
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 4 | Multicellularity: integrated Individuals arise from sharing bioelectrical information. (A) An individual cell perceives its local environment, and distinct cells 
perceive different local conditions. (B) When joined by gap junctions (electrical synapses), all of the cells have access to the same information, able to perceive states 
from the edge of the collective. This results in the ability of the system to react to and manipulate the large-scale environment in its homeostatic cycle. The ability to 
pursue spatio-temporally larger goals instantiates a bigger Individual with a different cognitive structure than any of the subunits. The sensory and set point conditions 
are scaled to the whole body, enabling maintenance of large anatomical features such as morphology. (C) The physiological coupling process can exhibit local 
breakdowns by loss of gap-junctional communication (which can be induced by oncogene activity) or by introducing physical barriers (which are known to induce 
cancer without any prior genetic damage). Individual cells thus disengage from the larger Individual, shrinking their cognitive horizon and reverting to their unicellular 
past resulting in over-proliferation and metastasis as the cell pursues its cell-level goals of individual survival. (D) Bacteria already had ion channels such as those 
used by metazoan cells, exploiting them and chemical receptors to sense their local environment in the same way that complex animals and plants use them as 
sensors. (E) Bacterial biofilms are proto-bodies, already using bioelectric signaling to enable time-sharing of nutrients across the collective – an early form of tissue-
level integrated goals (Prindle et al., 2015; Humphries et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017). All panels courtesy of Jeremy Guay of Peregrine Creative Inc.
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
13 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
between somatic bioelectric networks and neural networks sheds 
light on how local gap junctional connections in tissues were 
refined into more targeted connections on the scale of several 
cell diameters: tunneling nanotubes. This axon-like structure 
present in many cell types is an intermediate cellular appendage 
that has a gap junction at its end, allowing limited directed 
connections between cells in a tissue, and mechanistically presaging 
neural axons and their electrical synapses (Wang et  al., 2010; 
Sherer, 2013; Ariazi et al., 2017). The general bioelectric system 
was speed-optimized during the development of nervous systems 
for behavior (Van Duijn et al., 2006; Keijzer et al., 2013; Jekely 
et al., 2015), but uses fundamentally the same set of mechanisms 
to optimize the input-output relation within and between the 
internal milieu mechanisms and the outside world (Molnar-
Szakacs and Uddin, 2013; Fields et  al., 2019). Increasing the 
correlation length of such control could have driven the 
development of targeted, long cellular structures (axons): to 
move the whole animal, not just individual cells, the electrical 
information needs to be scaled considerably, and nervous systems 
are an ideal extension of ancient, pre-neural bioelectric signaling 
paths to enable further scaling of the cognitive boundary of 
cells into organs, organisms, swarms, and societies. A prediction 
of this proposed scaling is that swarm organisms should fall 
prey to the same kinds of cognitive illusions and specific failures 
of rationality as do vertebrate brains, which has indeed been 
observed in ants and slime molds (Sakiyama and Gunji, 2013, 
2016; Tani et  al., 2014; Beekman and Latty, 2015). Another 
consequence is that the cybernetics of associative learning in 
networks is agnostic as to the spatio-temporal scale and physical 
implementation, being widespread from molecular networks and 
inorganic physics to whole evolving populations (Cragg and 
Temperley, 1955; Mcgregor et  al., 2012; Power et  al., 2015; 
Watson and Szathmary, 2016; Kouvaris et al., 2017; Lopez Garcia 
De Lomana et  al., 2017).
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE OUTLOOK
“The self is not something ready-made, but something in 
continuous formation through choice of action.”
–John Dewey
A number of ideas from cognitive neuroscience, information 
theory, computer science, cybernetics, and engineering converge 
on key questions in biology with respect to the multi-scale 
interface between body structure and mind. The scheme described 
above seeks to (1) define Individuals and Selves in a way that 
facilitates taxonomy, comparison, and communication with 
evolved, created, biological, artificial, and exo-biological agents, 
and (2) propose a plausible naturalistic framework for the 
evolutionary scale-up of cognition from earliest origins of life, 
hypothesizing about the forces that drove it and the major 
transitions along the continuum. The goal of this research 
program is to show how complex agency and goal-directedness 
evolves naturally from ancient mechanisms. The evolutionary 
pressure to survive in a challenging world leads (in order) 
from simple homeostasis to infotaxis, memory, anticipation, 
spatio-temporal scale-up of measurement and prediction, and 
large-scale global goals (system-level agency). The implications 
of these hypotheses extend beyond philosophy and evolutionary 
biology. Practical strategies for regenerative medicine (control 
of cell collectives in vivo toward macrostates such as “healthy 
structure and function”), exobiology, and robotics/AI are impacted 
by our view of what defines a coherent Self.
BOX | Summary of key ideas of Scale-Free Cognition
1. A unified, integrated cognitive Self or Individual can be defined with respect to the integrated ability to pursue specific goals via a homeostatic process that resists 
perturbations. Goals also define positive and negative reinforcement for that agent, thus enabling communication with/training of highly diverse intelligences. The 
ability to pursue goals is a major ratchet for evolution because it smooths the selection landscape: the potentially destructive effects of individual mutations are 
often made up for by the regulative ability of other mechanisms to accomplish specific outcomes despite changes of circumstance (e.g., cells providing blood 
vessels and tendons to make a coherent finger when a new hand bone is induced).
2. An Agent’s cognitive world can be quantified and characterized, enabling comparison with others (regardless of their material implementation), by estimating the 
spatio-temporal boundaries of its area of concern: the volume in space and time over which the agent is able to take measurements, exert influence, and 
functionally link disparate events (learning, association).
3. The borders of the temporal and spatial events of which a given system is capable of measuring and acting map out a “cognitive light cone” – a boundary in the 
informational space of a mind. These borders can grow or shrink, on evolutionary or ontogenic time scales, as the organization of an agent changes. The key is 
a balance of selective information sharing, via “synapses” – structures of arbitrary physical construction which share the feature that they can regulate the passage 
of signals based on the state of other such elements. Too little sharing results in a failure to bind subunits into a new Self. Too much sharing results in a homogenous 
soup with insufficient differentiation of modules and abstraction of information across distinct layers.
4. Cancer is a (reversible) shrinking of the computational boundary of a biosystem: by isolating itself from the surrounding tissue’s physiological signals, a cell’s 
cognitive boundary shrinks to the small size it had before multicellularity. Cancer cells are not more selfish than somatic metazoan cells – they are equally selfish 
but their Self is now scaled down to a single cell (which will reproduce and migrate as much as it can), whereas the normal physiological binding in healthy tissues 
binds each cell to a common goal represented by the large network – the construction and repair of a specific large anatomy. These ideas connect naturally to 
gene-level views of selfishness (Dawkins, 1989); if it is useful to think of genes as selfish agents, it is doubly plausible to view cells and tissues as such, since the 
latter have much more capacity for activity and computation. Future work will develop, in the contexts of ontogeny and evolution, how the optimization of specific 
states of affairs (pursuit of goals – selfish or otherwise) occurs simultaneously at many scales of biological organization.
5. Agents scaled up by evolving from basic homeostatic loops, driven by active inference (surprise minimization) via addition of delays (memory), anticipation (inference), 
and networks (spatially-distributed processing that enables learning and progressive abstraction/generalization from data). Gathering into larger collectives with 
optimal informational structure (Klein and Hoel, 2019) improves the computational (predictive) capabilities and gives rise to functional relationships (memories, 
encoded goal states, test-operate-test-exit loops) that exist over and above any individual member (Miller et al., 1960). These levels coexist, enabling numerous 
coherent Selves of different scales to be implemented by any collection of living matter.
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
14 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
DISCUSSION
This view is consistent with Dennett’s stack of homunculi (Dennett, 
1991). Here, the bottom homunculus is a basic homeostatic 
loop, which is required for even the simplest life form to persist 
against entropy (Varela et al., 1974; Maturana and Varela, 1980). 
Each succeeding level of that same homunculus has a tiny bit 
more reach in physical space (how far it measures and how 
far its signals propagate) and in time (how long it remembers 
past signals and how far it can anticipate)  - the homunculus 
is not entirely blind but has a horizon within which it can 
perceive. The bottom homunculus measures very simple, immediate 
things (chemical concentrations on the surface of a single cell), 
and has a feedback loop that keeps that one variable within a 
life-compatible range. The others see a little more and manage 
slightly more complex allostasis. This naturally scales into “goal-
directed systems” and enables massive improvements in evolvability 
because these components make random moves in genotype 
space into acceptable (and sometimes brilliant) ones in phenotypic 
space. The functional modularity enabled by learning and goal-
directed feedback loops radically modify the evolutionary search 
space landscape, because they can improve the phenotypic quality 
of mutations. Mutations that by themselves would have been 
useless or harmful to the organism (because they usually adjust 
one feature without directly implementing the many others 
needed for functional advantage), can be  made workable if the 
various parts are flexible and alter their behavior to reach the 
same attractors despite shifting surroundings.
Developmental and regenerative biology are full of these 
examples, like the rearranged tadpole faces whose organs then 
move around to make a normal frog face (reviewed in (Lobo 
et  al., 2014; Pezzulo and Levin, 2015, 2016)). Likewise, 
manipulations that cause an ectopic bone to form in the 
embryonic hand do not simply result in a single, out of place 
bone  - the nearby muscle cells, blood vessels, and tendons 
make up for this novel circumstance and build an extra, 
workable finger. This helps explain Darwin’s original puzzle 
of evolvability because the body is not a static canvas or merely 
a set of features emerging from micro-level rules. Morphogenetic 
goal-directedness is a major evolutionary ratchet, smoothing 
the anatomical fitness landscape by hiding the otherwise 
potentially disruptive effects of random mutations. This is a 
point that has been made in the context of gene-regulatory 
circuits, whose self-organizing capacity takes a lot of the heavy 
lifting off of the evolutionary process (Kauffman, 1993).
When the subunits exhibit their own level of competent, local 
intelligence, many mutations do not need to occur before a 
feature is useful. One mutation can change how something 
operates, but the other parts may be able to continue to pursue 
their same anatomical goal even though conditions have changed. 
This somatic plasticity is ubiquitous in biology because complex 
agents inevitably consist of micro-agents that were selected on 
6. Infotaxis (the drive for better actionable intelligence about the regularities/patterns in the world, and in the agent’s own mechanisms) encourages cells to connect 
in groups via signaling. On the cellular level, this is implemented by diffusion (bacterial biofilm proto-bodies) or direct connections via gap junctions or neurons.
7. Collecting into a syncytium enables all of the cells to share the same data and access the same memories (illustrated, e.g., by the ability of trained slime molds 
to pass on information to naïve hosts by fusion [Vogel and Dussutour, 2016)], This shared information structure extends to the edges of the large collective, 
which binds small, individual competent sub-agents into a larger unified Self. These principles likely apply beyond cells in organs, to swarms of whole organisms 
such as bees and termites (Seeley, 2009; Turner, 2011), as do the dynamics of breakdowns in coordination which share important similarities for example 
between cancer and social insect colonies (Amdam and Seehuus, 2006).
8. The hypothesis of scale-free cognition does not rely on cooperation per se – it builds up apparent cooperation from selfish agents minimizing their stress (surprise) 
and competing for information. Greed, at the single-cell level, for information (infotaxis) drives cooperativity, as each unit expands its measurement boundary 
(communication with neighbors) and thus inevitably becomes part of a bigger self with bigger set points serving as homeostatic attractors. It only looks like 
cooperation from a perspective of a higher level, because the higher level of organization shows an integrated Self which appears, necessarily, cooperative.
9. There is a fundamental symmetry between anatomical control mechanisms and cognitive mechanisms. Co-evolution and exaptation drove the mutual enlargement 
of mechanisms that control patterning and behavioral goals. The same dynamics operate in unicellular systems, multicellular systems, and colonial/swarm 
organisms and most concepts from memory to cancer are found at every level of organization in biology, from memory in transcriptional networks to regeneration 
of termite nest structures.
10. Neurons utilize bioelectric computational strategies that were discovered and exploited by evolution as far back as bacteria. There are no sharp distinctions between 
neural networks and non-neural somatic bioelectrical networks (although they function on different time scales). The functional isomorphism between patterning and 
cognitive processes is also reflected in the ancient molecular conservation of mechanisms: ion channels and neurotransmitter molecules are ubiquitous across the 
tree of life. Bioelectric integration helped evolve control strategies and cognitive content across the continuum from chemical networks to human minds – it illustrates 
an important mechanism of early evolution. But clearly, numerous aspects of physics (from stress forces to diffusing chemicals/pheromones) are exploited by evolution, 
or could be exploited by engineers, across the wide range of possible systems.
11. There is a deep functional scale-invariance between the decision-making of cells in building body structures, the workings of an insect colony, and the integrated 
behavior of a human “Person”: these are the cybernetic processes of learning and parameter optimization implemented by large numbers of units pursuing 
infotaxis and homeostatic goals at whatever scale the sensory channels permit.
12. A conceptual unification is proposed as Scale-Free Cognition: one major control knob is the boundaries between self and world. These boundaries are malleable, and 
can shift at different time scales, to sizes limited by what the underlying hardware supports. This parameter determines the scope of the self and implements the continuum 
leading smoothly from cell- > body- > swarm. Signaling between animals in an ecosystem (Pais-Vieira et al., 2013; Kingsbury et al., 2019; Zhang and Yartsev, 2019) is 
not fundamentally different than signaling within the brain – both are examples of information propagating through a network of locally-competent micro-agents. Others 
have pointed out the parallels between the dynamics of cancer and ecosystem-level degradation (Degregori and Eldredge, 2019). Thus, multiple levels of approach to 
living systems are a priori equally valid, with no unique privilege for the lowest (molecular) levels at which everything looks like a mechanism. In any given example of 
biology or artificial life, the most appropriate level of analysis or description is to be determined empirically: it is the one that facilitates prediction and control with the least 
effort (by the experimenter or by the system itself), and gives rise to unified understanding that drives the most novel, robust research programs at the bench.
BOX | continued
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
15 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
the basis of proto-cognitive competency. This view of modularity 
from the perspective of basal cognition complements traditional 
genetic accounts. This is likely also the source of cognitive plasticity. 
Tadpoles engineered to develop with eyes on their tails instead 
of in their usual spot can see quite well, despite the fact that 
the eyes connect to the spinal cord, not the brain (Blackiston 
and Levin, 2013; Blackiston et  al., 2017). Brains, like other 
developing organs, are not hardwired but are able to ascertain 
the structure of the body and adjust their functional programs 
accordingly – a strategy that is already being pursued in robotics, 
including the use of electrophysiological principles (Bongard et al., 
2006; Cheney et al., 2014). This self-discovery phase is an important 
area for future research (Ramstead et  al., 2019).
The way regulatory pathways are organized (primitive 
intelligence of the parts, exploiting attractors in state space and 
modularity to attain goals at various levels despite changing 
conditions) makes complex traits much more easily evolvable. 
Organs and tissues have local goals (in the dynamical systems 
and control theory sense of ‘goals’) and their ability to reach 
these goals despite damage and changing environmental conditions 
(something for which evolution selected from day one) is what 
enables random mutations to power evolution in a rapid timeframe. 
From the perspective of the cells, a mutation is just another 
attack of a hostile environment - they need to keep going despite 
this perturbation, and they adjust their activity as they would 
to any external stressor. On this view, the organization of 
cybernetic control structures at different levels originating from 
simple homeostatic survival advantages, are the source of agency 
at multiple scales (Arnellos and Moreno, 2015).
This view has important implications for treatment of injury 
and disease (Levin, 2011). Most of the focus of biomedicine today 
is on the cellular hardware, seeking molecular- or cell-level 
interventions. The problem is that even with full genomic information 
and stem cell derivatives, directly creating an organ such as a 
human hand directly from individual cells is likely to be beyond 
our capabilities for a long time. Moreover, the complex, emergent 
nature of morphogenesis establishes an important inverse problem: 
how to manipulate low-level rules to achieve system level outcomes 
such as repair or regeneration of organs damaged by traumatic 
injury or disease? I have previously suggested that a better strategy 
than cellular re-wiring at the genetic level may be  to edit the 
pattern-homeostatic set point and let wild-type cells build to the 
new spec. For example, the ability to re-write target morphology 
in planarian regeneration was recently shown, by altering the 
bioelectric state in flatworms, without genomic editing, giving 
rise to permanently double-headed worms (Durant et  al., 2017; 
Levin et  al., 2018). Similarly, a brief stimulus (24-h exposure to 
chemical cocktail) kick-starts a limb regeneration module that 
drives growth for 11 months with no further intervention (Herrera-
Rincon et  al., 2018). This ability to initiate very complex, long-
lasting morphogenetic cascades via a simple trigger demonstrates 
the utility of understanding the modular control structure of 
large-scale patterning systems so that the most efficient (least 
effort, simplest) intervention can be  deployed, at the right level 
of organization, to induce a desired system-level outcome.
What is the difference between a mechanism and decision-
making (choice)? This has been widely discussed in the philosophy 
literature (Barandiaran and Moreno, 2006; Haig and Dennett, 
2017) and is now becoming an important issue for bench 
biologists working in basal cognition of somatic cells and 
synthetic biology (Perkins and Swain, 2009; Balazsi et al., 2011; 
Reid et  al., 2013, 2016; Mitchell and Lim, 2016; Paul et  al., 
2016; Vesty et  al., 2016; Bugaj et  al., 2017) as well as for 
workers in artificial life (Juel et al., 2019). Without attempting 
to deal with this profound question in full, it can be mentioned 
that the perspective taken herein suggests that several factors 
contribute to a smooth transition between biochemical 
mechanism and agency: integration of remote events into the 
causal chain (spatial distance, and temporal distance – memory/
anticipation), and stochasticity (distance in terms of predictive 
capability). The greater the area of the cognitive light cone 
that comprises the events that cause a particular outcome, the 
more likely that we  will gain explanatory and control power 
by treating it as a choice and not a push. If an outcome 
depends on things that happen far away, and in the past 
(memory) or future (planning), then it is likely to be empirically 
useful to consider that process a choice. This heuristic has 
the attractive natural corollary that the bigger the cognitive 
horizon (scope of self) of an agent, the more apparent freedom 
that agent has (when causes are very far away, in space and 
time, from a given action is when folk psychology usually 
labels an event as a free choice).
Bioelectric signaling is an ancient aspect of physics, which 
evolution exploited for its computational capacities. Neural 
Hodgkin-Huxley equations can be  derived from first principles 
of information theory (Gatenby and Frieden, 2017), but the use 
of bioelectrics long predates nervous systems. Why is bioelectricity, 
implemented by ion channel and gap junction protein hardware, 
so well-suited for implementing the flexible software of life? 
Voltage-gated ion channels and gap junctions are voltage-gated 
current conductors – basically transistors, from which as we know 
all manner of advanced computing devices can be  constructed. 
Such channels readily enable loops which either amplify small 
signals (positive feedback) or implement robustness (negative 
feedback), because they create voltage changes that then control 
their own activity (open or close the channel), in a physiological 
cycle that occurs at the post-translational level (not requiring 
any gene-regulatory mechanisms). Also, they very naturally link 
up into networks that enable spatial integration of signaling. 
Thus, any electrical circuit that enables feedback loops and memory 
is sufficient for very primitive software behavior in the following 
sense. It can stably occupy more than one state, and shifting it 
from one state to the other does not require changing out the 
hardware (altering protein profiles by transcriptional changes). 
What makes electric circuits, whether ion channel-mediated or 
electronic, good for software is that they easily implement dynamical 
systems that have multiple attractors and can be made to occupy 
one physiological state or another by transient inputs (signals), 
not requiring changing the hardware (i.e., mutating the DNA 
encoding that hardware). This is also true to some extent of 
physical forces and cytoskeletal controls, which can enable extremely 
rich morphogenetic and behavioral processing in unicellular 
organisms (Faure-Fremiet, 1953; Ford, 2017) and can scale up 
to tissue-level controls (Roper, 2013).
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
16 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
Some agents can transcend one system and re-set its goals 
from a vantage-point of a meta-system (Hofstadter, 1979). While 
many animals are capable of a wide repertoire of diverse goal-
seeking activity, human minds appear to be (for now) in a unique 
position. A fish can successfully meet the most basic goal of 
“survival” because it only sees a short time into the future, and 
surviving for that short time is usually achievable. However, 
humans (who are prone to reflection on these issues) can infer 
that “survival” is not actually an achievable goal on timescales 
that we can think about; uniquely among goal-pursuing systems, 
we  alone know that this most basic of all life goals is doomed 
to failure. We are the only known agents who must change their 
goals, because our cognitive horizon is, along the temporal axis, 
greater than our lifespan and we  can envision goals that extend 
beyond our own life. Therefore, we as cognitive agents are perhaps 
uniquely motivated to set other goals ahead of survival (Frankl 
and Vance, 2007). This potentially includes pursuit of the most 
radical goal of all, to cease functioning as a unified goal-seeking 
system entirely. “To be, or not to be?” – when did this question 
first get asked, phylogenetically? A cabbage cannot commit suicide. 
A human can; could a non-human primate? As with other kinds 
of behavioral capacities (Bronfman et  al., 2016), this capability 
likely represented an important phylogenetic cognitive transition. 
Individual cells have this capacity [even unicellular organisms 
(Gordeeva et  al., 2004)]; it is unclear if metazoan organs do. 
The synthetic biologists may want to ask, how would we  create 
an organism capable of such a meta-goal?
PREDICTIONS AND RESEARCH 
PROGRAM
Needless to say, many details of this set of ideas remain to 
be worked out. However, the above-described perspective makes 
a number of specific predictions which suggest experimental 
approaches to test and exploit this perspective (Levin, 2011). 
Future empirical work will reveal whether Scale Free Cognition 
is a useful way to organize what we know about the mechanisms 
and algorithms of life and life-as-it-could be  (Langton, 1995; 
Walker and Davies, 2013). Directions for future research, 
suggested specifically by this synthesis, include:
1. Rapid and successful adaptation of biological systems, at the 
cell and tissue level, to novel perturbations should be considered 
with respect to the cognitive task of inferring which genes to 
activate (microscale) to deal with a physiological stressor 
(macrostate) (Elgart et al., 2015, 2016; Soen et al., 2015; Schreier 
et  al., 2017). Is there a quantifiable sense in which biological 
systems model themselves? Can tools such as information theory 
or other approaches be  used to identify signatures in time-
series data of regulatory events of attempts by gene-regulatory 
and bioelectric networks to coarse-grain themselves – to discover 
their own causal structure for optimally efficient self-control?
2. Can an in silico evolutionary system be built, containing both 
genetic and physiological components, which simulates the 
scheme described above (homeostasis and infotaxis) and illustrates 
the emergence of different scales of cognitive horizons over 
time? Can we  directly observe the evolution of multicellular 
goals from networking of agents with single-cell homeostatic goals?
3. Because of the mechanistic and functional commonalities 
between cognition and patterning, neurotransmitters are ancient 
control mechanisms functioning also outside the nervous system 
in fungi, plants, and animals. It is already known that perturbation 
of these pathways can induce low-level effects [perturb 
developmental patterning (Buznikov and Shmukler, 1981; 
Hernandez-Diaz and Levin, 2014; Sullivan and Levin, 2016)] 
but might there be  higher level effects on the physiological 
boundaries of the cognitive sub-agents within the body from 
exposure to psychedelics, which have long been claimed to 
expand “transpersonal boundaries” or induce “ego death” (Bouso 
et  al., 2015; Carhart-Harris et  al., 2016)? Specifically, the 
implementation of multicellularity by the drive to minimize 
predictive error (Fields and Levin, 2019) suggests that cells 
need a way to keep other cells nearby. This suggests the testable 
hypothesis that the addictive power of opiates and similar 
molecules derives from such ancient roots. Functional experiments 
targeting addiction pathways can readily be attempted in early 
models of multicellularity and in somatic/stem cell co-cultures 
in vitro, to identify or disprove an ancient role for addictive 
neurochemicals in this process.
4. It would be instructive to start fleshing out the cognitive light 
cone diagrams with behavioral data from real organisms and 
available AI agents, as well as single cancer cells in vitro and 
in vivo, and tumors. Additional concepts in this space may 
need to be  added, such as conservation principles; e.g., the 
amount of “mental energy” for caring about things and making 
decisions is certainly limited in humans (Weippert et al., 2018); 
can we measure and define the thermodynamic/metabolic costs 
of decision-making in basal cognition? More broadly, the 
analogies between geometric spaces and cognitive ones needs 
to be explored further, as is beginning to be done via geometric 
information theory (Balduzzi and Tononi, 2009; Oizumi et al., 
2016; Sengupta et al., 2016; Calcagni, 2018). Indeed, the notion 
of spaces with different geometry has been pursued both in 
the neuroscience of perception and representation (Zhou et al., 
2018b; Gilead et  al., 2019) and in developmental biology of 
patterning (Jaeger et  al., 2008; Jaeger and Monk, 2014). It 
may even be  possible to go backwards, asking what cognitive 
structure accompanies a particular space-time geometry – a 
concept that might have been presaged by Newton’s concept 
of space being the “Sensorium of God”.
5. A major question in AI is motivation (McShea, 2013) – will 
complex engineered systems set novel goals, and if so, how? 
It is usually extremely obvious how to negatively motivate a 
living organism, but how does one punish an artificial agent? 
It may be  that until we  have artificial constructs that are, at 
their core, homeostatic goal-seeking systems, which will be as 
easy to motivate as living things, significant general AI will 
not be  possible. While biology has competent agents at each 
scale (McShea, 2012), most human artifacts do not – robots 
are often made of reliable but very dumb parts [although 
modular designs with sub-goals have already been shown to 
be  a useful strategy (Cudhea and Brooks, 1986)]. It is a 
prediction of this view that adaptive, useful robotics will require 
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
17 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
components that are themselves competent and goal-seeking. 
The fact that robot cancer is not a known problem today is 
likely the same reason we do not have highly adaptive, robust 
robotics: selection of activity (feedback based on positive and 
negative reinforcement toward local goals) is applied only at 
one level. Subunits rich enough to make a good cognitive 
Self will occasionally defect and go off the reservation as human 
cells sometimes do. This suggests a roadmap for engineering 
agents that are fundamentally based on homeostatic goals and 
selfish infotaxis at multiple levels of organization.
6. The importance of physiological connectivity in keeping 
cells harnessed toward a global body plan and away from 
cancer has long been known. The lack of multicellular 
information is a potent carcinogen; e.g., plastic barriers (but 
not the same plastic powder) placed between cells induces 
tumors, as do gap junction blockers (Oppenheimer et  al., 
1953; Bischoff and Bryson, 1964; Yamasaki et  al., 1995). 
Data in amphibians already show that modulation of the 
bioelectric state and connectivity of cell networks can prevent 
and reverse tumorigenesis (Chernet et al., 2015, 2016); thus, 
the next work in this subfield should focus on the discovery 
of bioelectric communication-inducing technology [whether 
through gap junctional opener drugs or bioelectric 
nanomaterials (Jayaram et al., 2017) for cancer reprogramming 
as an alternative to chemotherapy]. Another possibility is 
that stress (physiological, or informational – signals that 
cannot be predicted by a cell) could be a factor that motivates 
cells to reduce their sensory/action surface and contract, in 
effect abandoning organismal membership when it begins 
to generate more stress than its presence reduces by its 
protective action. The current research on the relationship 
between stress and cancer (Benndorf and Bielka, 1997) could 
be  modeled from the perspective of surprise minimization.
7. The proposed crucial role of bioelectrics in multicellularity 
predicts that it should be  possible to induce the formation 
of metazoan-like bodies in an otherwise unicellular organism 
by forcing the expression of appropriate electrogenic proteins 
and gap junctions. Similarly, it may be  possible to induce 
dissolution of an entire metazoan body by appropriate changes 
of bioelectric dynamics.
8. Bioelectrics should be widely conserved in regeneration across 
Kingdoms; transcriptomic analyses of regeneration events 
from damaged bacterial biofilms to plants to metazoan models 
of limb and organ regeneration should all show consistent 
use of electrogenic proteins in the events that enable cooperation 
toward self-limiting morphogenetic cascades. Likewise, it 
should be  the case that neurotransmitter signaling (a key 
downstream response module for bioelectric change) should 
be highly conserved, revealing effects of cognitive modulator 
drugs on function in bacterial biofilms and primitive cognition 
models such as Physarum (Maier et  al., 2018).
9. The evolution of neural control systems from pre-neural 
morphogenetic mechanisms suggests that there should be  a 
lot of interplay between these systems in development. The 
requirement of a functional CNS for effective organ regeneration 
(Brockes, 1987) and for correct patterning in development 
(Herrera-Rincon et al., 2017; Herrera-Rincon and Levin, 2018) 
has been shown in a range of model species, and the tools 
of optogenetics can now be  used to dissect the information 
content of nerve-mediated signaling as instructive cues for 
both normal morphogenesis and regulative development in 
which bodies adapt to major changes in architecture  
(Oviedo et  al., 2010).
10. The continuum view of cognition suggests that the cognitive 
ability to learn from experience and act to maximize specific 
parameters to increase welfare is universal across scales. Much 
work remains to characterize and exploit phenomena such 
as cardiac memory (Chakravarthy and Ghosh, 1997; Zoghi, 
2004), and learning in bone (Turner et  al., 2002; Spencer 
and Genever, 2003) and in gene-regulatory networks (Herrera-
Delgado et  al., 2018). Emerging technologies for real-time, 
closed-loop controls (Bugaj et al., 2017; Perkins et al., 2019) 
now enable interrogation of cellular cognition in a variety 
of somatic contexts ex vivo. We  have previously suggested 
the use of behavior shaping and training paradigms as a 
strategy for synthetic morphology and regenerative medicine 
that complements bottom-up rewiring at the molecular level 
(Pezzulo and Levin, 2015, 2016; Mathews and Levin, 2017).
11. Similarly, it should be  possible to communicate with (train) 
swarm organisms. Moreover, the scale-free cognition hypothesis 
suggests that multi-human systems could have their own 
degree of cognition. We speak this way informally (the Supreme 
Court has opinions, a town may send letters to specific people, 
and countries are often portrayed as having intentions and 
behavioral traits in political planning). Tools of information 
theory and reinforcement learning techniques could be tested 
on the behavior of human social groups, to determine if 
there is a true psychology of an integrated Self that can 
be predicted and managed as a coherent goal-seeking individual. 
It is fascinating to note that swarm cognition, in the sense 
of a new supervenient Self which makes choices and reaps 
the consequences, is a concept proposed long ago in pre-scientific 
thought about cognition (Hutchinson and Sharp, 2008).
12. Ascertaining the functional set points (goals) of a given system 
has implications for open questions in exobiology and artificial 
life. First, it facilitates identification of a system’s boundaries –  
empirical hypotheses about what subset of a complex biosphere 
is practical to consider a unified Individual. This is sometimes 
obvious in the world of terrestrial biology, but it is an important 
potential problem to be  encountered in research in Life as 
it Could Be (Langton, 1995). Second, it enables communication 
with highly diverse intelligences (evolved or constructed), with 
whom we may share no language and few mental constructs. 
Given a novel life form, how does one know when successful 
communication has taken place? A basic form of communication 
is behavior shaping: if a system can be  made to act in a 
pre-determined 
way 
through 
positive 
and 
negative 
reinforcement, then one is sure that at least one thing has 
been communicated: the desired activity. Of course this is a 
very minimal notion of communication, but it is a practical 
and useful starting point in scenarios where the biology or 
engineering is truly novel. This requires understanding what 
motivates the system (i.e., what conditions it seeks vs. avoids) 
and takes advantage of its innate goal-seeking behavior.
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
18 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
WHAT DOES IT FEEL LIKE TO  
BE  A PANCREAS?
Most of the prior discussion focused on objective, functional 
traits, and capabilities and is compatible with several views 
on consciousness. Nothing in this model explains why specific 
functional features give rise to first-person experience (the 
so-called Hard Problem). But, given that at least some nervous 
systems do give rise to such experience and that the differences 
between neural networks and non-neural ones (aside from 
temporal scale) are minimal, it is natural to hypothesize that 
there is something-it-is-like to being a tissue or organ and 
making decisions. It is not claimed of course that a pancreas, 
in its striving to keep homeostasis, has any self-awareness in 
the human sense, but it may have as much proto-consciousness 
as a simple neural network and indeed diabetes has already 
been modeled as a kind of cognitive disorder (Arntfield and 
van der Kooy, 2011; Goel and Mehta, 2013). The model does 
take a stand on the perennial “combination problem” and can 
perhaps be  seen as a form of panpsychism (Chalmers, 2013).
One final comment concerns an interesting intersection 
of the above model with non-Western views on consciousness. 
It is striking that the process which Zen practice is meant 
to reverse – attachment to past memories and high valence 
for future expectations/fears – is precisely the process suggested 
to be  responsible for the creation of complex Selves. It is 
unclear whether it is beneficial (or even possible) to truly 
live in the moment and let go of past memories and future 
expectations, but anyone who succeeded in doing this would 
achieve precisely what Zen promises: the dissolution of the 
self (Flanagan, 2011; Josipovic, 2014, 2019). According to 
the above model, the Zen ideas of stamping out desire (goal-
directed activity, preferences for specific states of affairs) are 
exactly correct in that this would lead to a dissolution of 
the ego (Self) and the freedom from the law of cause and 
effect that governs the Individual’s actions. By turning off 
memory, anticipation, and striving, the essential glue that 
creates a cognitive Self is dissolved. By erasing the set point 
toward which the feedback loop expends energy to accomplish, 
the higher level integrated Self disappears, leaving nothing 
but the constituent parts (smaller Selves in their own right). 
This is completely different from killing the individual 
components, and it can be  asked whether someday we  will 
develop a biochemical path to the Nirvanic Void, which 
releases the global self by breaking the integrating 
communication channels but leaves all of the subunits healthy 
and free to pursue their local goals. Re-creating the unification 
into, and liberation from, larger scale unifying Selves 
would  be  a true pinnacle of synthetic biology and artificial 
intelligence engineering.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work 
and has approved it for publication.
FUNDING
ML gratefully acknowledges support via an Allen Discovery Center 
award from The Paul G. Allen Frontiers Group (12171) and via 
the Templeton World Charity Foundation (TWCF0089/AB55).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is dedicated to the memory of Werner Loewenstein, 
a pioneer of the importance of gap junctions in the physiology 
of body and mind. I thank Benjamin Levin, willo Levin, Daniel 
C. Dennett, Erik Hoel, Rafael Yuste, David Haig, Stephan 
Koehler, the members of the Levin lab, and many people in 
the basal cognition community for many useful discussions. 
For helpful comments on an early version of this manuscript, 
I  am  grateful to Santosh Manicka, Richard Gawne, Joshua 
Finkelstein, Nima Dehghani, Joshua Bongard, and Christopher 
Fields (who suggested the term “Scale-Free Cognition”).
 
REFERENCES
Albrecht-Buehler, G. (1985). Is cytoplasm intelligent too? Cell Muscle Motil. 6, 
1–21.
Amdam, G. V., and Seehuus, S. C. (2006). Order, disorder, death: lessons  
from a superorganism. Adv. Cancer Res. 95, 31–60. doi: 10.1016/
S0065-230X(06)95002-7
Ariazi, J., Benowitz, A., De Biasi, V., Den Boer, M. L., Cherqui, S., Cui, H., 
et al. (2017). Tunneling nanotubes and gap junctions-their role in long-
range intercellular communication during development, health, and disease 
conditions. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 10:333. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00333
Arnellos, A., and Moreno, A. (2015). Multicellular agency: an organizational 
view. Biol. Philos. 30, 333–357. doi: 10.1007/s10539-015-9484-0
Arntfield, M. E., and Van Der Kooy, D. (2011). Beta-cell evolution: how the 
pancreas borrowed from the brain: the shared toolbox of genes expressed 
by neural and pancreatic endocrine cells may reflect their evolutionary 
relationship. BioEssays 33, 582–587. doi: 10.1002/bies.201100015
Ay, N., and Lohr, W. (2015). The Umwelt of an embodied agent--a measure-
theoretic 
definition. 
Theory 
Biosci. 
134, 
105–116. 
doi: 
10.1007/
s12064-015-0217-3
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., Ramstead, M. J. D., Ploeger, A., and Hohwy, J. 
(2019). The hierarchically mechanistic mind: an evolutionary systems theory 
of the human brain, cognition, and behavior. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 
19, 1319–1351. doi: 10.3758/s13415-019-00721-3
Balazsi, G., Van Oudenaarden, A., and Collins, J. J. (2011). Cellular decision 
making and biological noise: from microbes to mammals. Cell 144, 910–925. 
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.030
Balduzzi, D., and Tononi, G. (2009). Qualia: the geometry of integrated 
information. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5:e1000462. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000462
Baluška, F., and Levin, M. (2016). On having no head: cognition throughout 
biological systems. Front. Psychol. 7:902. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00902
Baluska, F., Yokawa, K., Mancuso, S., and Baverstock, K. (2016). Understanding 
of anesthesia  - why consciousness is essential for life and not based on 
genes. Commun. Integr. Biol. 9:e1238118. doi: 10.1080/19420889.2016.1238118
Barandiaran, X. E., Di Paolo, E., and Rohde, M. (2009). Defining agency: 
individuality, normativity, asymmetry, and spatio-temporality in action. Adapt. 
Behav. 17, 367–386. doi: 10.1177/1059712309343819
Barandiaran, X., and Moreno, A. (2006). On what makes certain dynamical 
systems cognitive: a minimally cognitive organization program. Adapt. Behav. 
14, 171–185. doi: 10.1177/105971230601400208
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
19 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
Barvitenko, N., Lawen, A., Aslam, M., Pantaleo, A., Saldanha, C., 
Skverchinskaya, E., et al. (2018). Integration of intracellular signaling: 
biological analogues of wires, processors and memories organized by a 
centrosome 3D reference system. Biosystems 173, 191–206. doi: 10.1016/j.
biosystems.2018.08.007
Bates, E. (2015). Ion channels in development and cancer. Annu. Rev. Cell 
Dev. Biol. 31, 231–247. doi: 10.1146/annurev-cellbio-100814-125338
Beekman, M., and Latty, T. (2015). Brainless but multi-headed: decision making 
by the acellular slime mould Physarum polycephalum. J. Mol. Biol. 427, 
3734–3743. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.07.007
Beekman, M., and Oldroyd, B. P. (2008). When workers disunite: intraspecific 
parasitism by eusocial bees. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 53, 19–37. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.ento.53.103106.093515
Beer, R. D. (2014). The cognitive domain of a glider in the game of life. 
Art&Life 20, 183–206. doi: 10.1162/ARTL_a_00125
Benndorf, R., and Bielka, H. (1997). Cellular stress response: stress proteins-- 
physiology and implications for cancer. Recent Results Cancer Res. 143, 129–144.
Bernard, C. (1865). An introduction to the study of experimental medicine. 
Paris: Macmillan & Co., Ltd.
Bischoff, F., and Bryson, G. (1964). Carcinogenesis through solid state surfaces. 
Prog. Exp. Tumor Res. 5, 85–133.
Blackiston, D. J., and Levin, M. (2013). Ectopic eyes outside the head in Xenopus 
tadpoles provide sensory data for light-mediated learning. J. Exp. Biol. 216, 
1031–1040. doi: 10.1242/jeb.074963
Blackiston, D. J., Vien, K., and Levin, M. (2017). Serotonergic stimulation 
induces nerve growth and promotes visual learning via posterior eye grafts 
in a vertebrate model of induced sensory plasticity. NPJ Regen. Med. 2:8. 
doi: 10.1038/s41536-017-0012-5
Blackwell, K. T. (2006). Subcellular, cellular, and circuit mechanisms underlying 
classical conditioning in Hermissenda crassicornis. Anat. Rec. B New Anat. 
289, 25–37. doi: 10.1002/ar.b.20090
Bohm, J., Scherzer, S., Krol, E., Kreuzer, I., Von Meyer, K., Lorey, C., et al. 
(2016). The Venus flytrap Dionaea muscipula counts prey-induced action 
potentials to induce sodium uptake. Curr. Biol. 26, 286–295. doi: 10.1016/j.
cub.2015.11.057
Boisseau, R. P., Vogel, D., and Dussutour, A. (2016). Habituation in non-neural 
organisms: evidence from slime moulds. Proc. Biol. Sci. 283:pii: 20160446. 
doi: 10.1098/rspb.2016.0446
Bongard, J., Zykov, V., and Lipson, H. (2006). Resilient machines through 
continuous self-modeling. Science 314, 1118–1121. doi: 10.1126/science.1133687
Bouso, J. C., Palhano-Fontes, F., Rodriguez-Fornells, A., Ribeiro, S., Sanches, R., 
Crippa, J. A., et al. (2015). Long-term use of psychedelic drugs is associated 
with differences in brain structure and personality in humans. Eur. 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 25, 483–492. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2015.01.008
Boussard, A., Delescluse, J., Perez-Escudero, A., and Dussutour, A. (2019). Memory 
inception and preservation in slime moulds: the quest for a common mechanism. 
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 374:20180368. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2018.0368
Brockes, J. P. (1987). The nerve dependence of amphibian limb regeneration. 
J. Exp. Biol. 132, 79–91.
Bronfman, Z. Z., Ginsburg, S., and Jablonka, E. (2016). The transition to minimal 
consciousness through the evolution of associative learning. Front. Psychol. 
7:1954. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01954
Buchanan, J. W. (1922). The control of head formation in Planaria by means 
of anesthetics. Chicago, USA: Hull Zoological Laboratory, University of Chicago.
Bugaj, L. J., O’donoghue, G. P., and Lim, W. A. (2017). Interrogating cellular 
perception and decision making with optogenetic tools. J. Cell Biol. 216, 
25–28. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201612094
Bugaj, L. J., Sabnis, A. J., Mitchell, A., Garbarino, J. E., Toettcher, J. E.,  
Bivona, T. G., et al. (2018). Cancer mutations and targeted drugs can disrupt 
dynamic signal encoding by the Ras-Erk pathway. Science 361:eaao3048. 
doi: 10.1126/science.aao3048
Bulcha, J. T., Giese, G. E., Ali, M. Z., Lee, Y. U., Walker, M. D., Holdorf, A. D., 
et al. (2019). A persistence detector for metabolic network rewiring in an 
animal. Cell Rep. 26, 460–468. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.12.064
Burkhardt, P. (2015). The origin and evolution of synaptic proteins - choanoflagellates 
lead the way. J. Exp. Biol. 218, 506–514. doi: 10.1242/jeb.110247
Bussey, K. J., Cisneros, L. H., Lineweaver, C. H., and Davies, P. C. W. (2017). 
Ancestral gene regulatory networks drive cancer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
114, 6160–6162. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1706990114
Buznikov, G. A., and Shmukler, Y. B. (1981). Possible role of “prenervous” 
neurotransmitters in cellular interactions of early embryogenesis: a hypothesis. 
Neurochem. Res. 6, 55–68. doi: 10.1007/BF00963906
Calcagni, G. (2018). The geometry of learning. J. Math. Psychol. 84, 74–88. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jmp.2018.03.007
Cannon, W. B. (1932). The wisdom of the body. New York: Norton.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Muthukumaraswamy, S., Roseman, L., Kaelen, M., Droog, W., 
Murphy, K., et al. (2016). Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed 
by multimodal neuroimaging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 4853–4858. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1518377113
Cenek, M. (2011). Information processing in two-dimensional cellular automata. 
PhD thesis. Portland State University.
Cervera, J., Pietak, A., Levin, M., and Mafe, S. (2018). Bioelectrical coupling 
in multicellular domains regulated by gap junctions: a conceptual approach. 
Bioelectrochemistry 123, 45–61. doi: 10.1016/j.bioelechem.2018.04.013
Chakravarthy, S. V., and Ghosh, J. (1997). On Hebbian-like adaptation in heart 
muscle: a proposal for ‘cardiac memory’. Biol. Cybern. 76, 207–215. doi: 
10.1007/s004220050333
Chalmers, D. (2013). Panpsychism and panprotopsychism. Amherst Lect. 
Philos. 8. doi: 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199359943.003.0002
Cheney, N., Clune, J., and Lipson, H. (2014). Evolved electrophysiological soft 
robots. ALIFE 14, 222–229. doi: 10.7551/978-0-262-32621-6-ch037
Chernet, B. T., Adams, D. S., Lobikin, M., and Levin, M. (2016). Use of 
genetically encoded, light-gated ion translocators to control tumorigenesis. 
Oncotarget 7, 19575–19588. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8036
Chernet, B. T., Fields, C., and Levin, M. (2015). Long-range gap junctional 
signaling controls oncogene-mediated tumorigenesis in Xenopus laevis embryos. 
Front. Physiol. 5:519. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00519
Chernet, B., and Levin, M. (2013a). Endogenous voltage potentials and the 
microenvironment: bioelectric signals that reveal, induce and normalize 
cancer. J. Clin. Exp. Oncol. (Suppl. 1), pii: S1-002. doi: 10.4172/2324-9110.
S1-002
Chernet, B. T., and Levin, M. (2013b). Transmembrane voltage potential is an 
essential cellular parameter for the detection and control of tumor development 
in a Xenopus model. Dis. Model. Mech. 6, 595–607. doi: 10.1242/dmm.010835
Chernet, B. T., and Levin, M. (2014). Transmembrane voltage potential of 
somatic cells controls oncogene-mediated tumorigenesis at long-range. 
Oncotarget 5, 3287–3306. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1935
Child, C. M. (1915). Individuality in organisms. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Cook, N. D., Carvalho, G. B., and Damasio, A. (2014). From membrane 
excitability to metazoan psychology. Trends Neurosci. 37, 698–705. doi: 
10.1016/j.tins.2014.07.011
Couzin, I. D. (2009). Collective cognition in animal groups. Trends Cogn. Sci. 
13, 36–43. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2008.10.002
Cragg, B. G., and Temperley, H. N. (1955). Memory: the analogy with ferromagnetic 
hysteresis. Brain 78, 304–316. doi: 10.1093/brain/78.2.304
Crutchfield, J. P., Mitchell, M., and Das, R. (1998). The evolutionary design 
of collective computation in cellular automata. arXiv e-prints [Preprint]. 
Available at: https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998adap.org..9001C (Accessed 
September 01, 1998).
Cudhea, P. W., and Brooks, R. A. (1986). Coordinating multiple goals for a 
mobile robot, preprints of intelligent autonomous systems. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Intelligent Autonomous Systems, 168–174.
Daniels, B. C., Ellison, C. J., Krakauer, D. C., and Flack, J. C. (2016). Quantifying 
collectivity. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 37, 106–113. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2016.01.012
Davies, P. C. W., and Lineweaver, C. H. (2011). Cancer tumors as Metazoa 
1.0: tapping genes of ancient ancestors. Phys. Biol. 8:015001. doi: 
10.1088/1478-3975/8/1/015001
Dawkins, R. (1989). The selfish gene. New York: Oxford.
De Berker, A. O., Rutledge, R. B., Mathys, C., Marshall, L., Cross, G. F., 
Dolan, R. J., et al. (2016). Computations of uncertainty mediate acute stress 
responses in humans. Nat. Commun. 7:10996. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10996
Degregori, J., and Eldredge, N. (2019). Parallel causation in oncogenic and 
anthropogenic degradation and extinction. Biol. Theory. doi: 10.1007/
s13752-019-00331-9
Deisboeck, T. S., and Couzin, I. D. (2009). Collective behavior in cancer cell 
populations. BioEssays 31, 190–197. doi: 10.1002/bies.200800084
Dennett, D. (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
20 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness explained. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Dennett, D. C. (2017). From bacteria to Bach and back: The evolution of minds. 
New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Dent, E. W. (2017). Of microtubules and memory: implications for microtubule 
dynamics in dendrites and spines. Mol. Biol. Cell 28, 1–8. doi: 10.1091/
mbc.E15-11-0769
Dewan, E. M. (1976). “Consciousness as an emergent causal agent in the 
context of control system theory” in Consciousness and the brain: A scientific 
and philosophical inquiry. eds. G. M. G. Globus and I. Savodnik (New York: 
Plenum Press), 181–198.
Dhar, R., Sagesser, R., Weikert, C., and Wagner, A. (2013). Yeast adapts to a 
changing stressful environment by evolving cross-protection and anticipatory 
gene regulation. Mol. Biol. Evol. 30, 573–588. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mss253
Dingle, K., Camargo, C. Q., and Louis, A. A. (2018). Input-output maps are 
strongly biased towards simple outputs. Nat. Commun. 9:761. doi: 10.1038/
s41467-018-03101-6
Durant, F., Morokuma, J., Fields, C., Williams, K., Adams, D. S., and Levin, M. 
(2017). Long-term, stochastic editing of regenerative anatomy via targeting 
endogenous bioelectric gradients. Biophys. J. 112, 2231–2243. doi: 10.1016/j.
bpj.2017.04.011
Egeblad, M., Nakasone, E. S., and Werb, Z. (2010). Tumors as organs: complex 
tissues that interface with the entire organism. Dev. Cell 18, 884–901. doi: 
10.1016/j.devcel.2010.05.012
Eisenstein, E. M. (1975). Aneural organisms in neurobiology. New York: 
Plenum Press.
Elgart, M., Snir, O., and Soen, Y. (2015). Stress-mediated tuning of developmental 
robustness and plasticity in flies. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1849, 462–466. 
doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.08.004
Elgart, M., Stern, S., Salton, O., Gnainsky, Y., Heifetz, Y., and Soen, Y. (2016). 
Impact of gut microbiota on the fly's germ line. Nat. Commun. 7:11280. 
doi: 10.1038/ncomms11280
Erkenbrack, E. M., Maziarz, J. D., Griffith, O. W., Liang, C., Chavan, A. R., 
Nnamani, M. C., et al. (2018). The mammalian decidual cell evolved from a 
cellular stress response. PLoS Biol. 16:e2005594. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.2005594
Fankhauser, G. (1945). Maintenance of normal structure in heteroploid salamander 
larvae, through compensation of changes in cell size by adjustment of cell 
number and cell shape. J. Exp. Zool. 100, 445–455. doi: 10.1002/jez.1401000310
Farinella-Ferruzza, N. (1956). The transformation of a tail into a limb after 
xenoplastic transformation. Experientia 15, 304–305.
Faure-Fremiet, E. (1953). Morphology of protozoa. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 7, 
1–18. doi: 10.1146/annurev.mi.07.100153.000245
Fields, C., Bischof, J., and Levin, M. (2019). Morphological coordination: Unifying 
neural and non-neural signaling. Physiology (in press).
Fields, C., and Levin, M. (2019). Somatic multicellularity as a satisficing solution 
to the prediction-error minimization problem. Commun. Integrative Biol. 
12, 119–132. doi: 10.1080/19420889.2019.1643666
Flack, J. C. (2012). Multiple time-scales and the developmental dynamics of 
social systems. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 367, 1802–1810. 
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2011.0214
Flack, J. C. (2017). Coarse-graining as a downward causation mechanism. Philos. 
Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 375, pii: 20160338. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2016.0338
Flanagan, O. (2011). The Bodhisattva's brain: Buddhism naturalized. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Ford, B. J. (2017). Cellular intelligence: microphenomenology and the realities of 
being. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 131, 273–287. doi: 10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2017.08.012
Frankl, V. E., and Vance, S. (2007). Man's search for meaning. Ashland, Or: 
Blackstone Audio.
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we  know it. J. R. Soc. Interface 10:20130475. doi: 
10.1098/rsif.2013.0475
Friston, K., and Ao, P. (2012). Free energy, value, and attractors. Comput. 
Math. Methods Med. 2012:937860. doi: 10.1155/2012/937860
Friston, K., Levin, M., Sengupta, B., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Knowing one’s 
place: a free-energy approach to pattern regulation. J. R. Soc. Interface 12, 
pii: 20141383. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2014.1383
Friston, K., Samothrakis, S., and Montague, R. (2012). Active inference and 
agency: optimal control without cost functions. Biol. Cybern. 106, 523–541. 
doi: 10.1007/s00422-012-0512-8
Funk, R. (2013). Ion gradients in tissue and organ biology. Bio Systems 2:105. 
doi: 10.4172/2329-6577.1000105
Gabalda-Sagarra, M., Carey, L. B., and Garcia-Ojalvo, J. (2018). Recurrence-
based information processing in gene regulatory networks. Chaos 28:106313. 
doi: 10.1063/1.5039861
Gabrilovich, D. I. (2017). Myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Cancer Immunol. 
Res. 5, 3–8. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-16-0297
Gagliano, M., Abramson, C. I., and Depczynski, M. (2018). Plants learn and 
remember: lets get used to it. Oecologia 186, 29–31. doi: 10.1007/s00442-017-4029-7
Gatenby, R. A., and Frieden, B. R. (2017). Cellular information dynamics through 
transmembrane flow of ions. Sci. Rep. 7:15075. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-15182-2
Gilead, M., Trope, Y., and Liberman, N. (2019). Above and beyond the concrete: 
the diverse representational substrates of the predictive brain. Behav. Brain 
Sci. 18, 1–63. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X19002000
Ginsburg, S., Jablonka, E., and Zeligowski, A. (2019). The evolution of the 
sensitive soul: Learning and the origins of consciousness. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2009). Darwinian populations and natural selection. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2016). Individuality, subjectivity, and minimal cognition. 
Biol. Philos. 31, 775–796. doi: 10.1007/s10539-016-9543-1
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2017). The subject as cause and effect of evolution. Interface 
Focus 7:20170022. doi: 10.1098/rsfs.2017.0022
Goel, P., and Mehta, A. (2013). Learning theories reveal loss of pancreatic 
electrical connectivity in diabetes as an adaptive response. PLoS One 8:e70366. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070366
Gogna, R., Shee, K., and Moreno, E. (2015). Cell competition during growth 
and regeneration. Annu. Rev. Genet. 49, 697–718. doi: 10.1146/annurev-
genet-112414-055214
Gomes, J., Urbano, P., and Christensen, A. L. (2013). Evolution of swarm 
robotics systems with novelty search. Swarm Intell. 7, 115–144. doi: 10.1007/
s11721-013-0081-z
Gordeeva, A. V., Labas, Y. A., and Zvyagilskaya, R. A. (2004). Apoptosis in 
unicellular organisms: mechanisms and evolution. Biochemistry 69, 1055–1066. 
doi: 10.1023/B:BIRY.0000046879.54211.ab
Graham, D. M., Andersen, T., Sharek, L., Uzer, G., Rothenberg, K.,  
Hoffman, B. D., et al. (2018). Enucleated cells reveal differential roles of 
the nucleus in cell migration, polarity, and mechanotransduction. J. Cell 
Biol. 217, 895–914. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201706097
Gregg, J. R. (1959). On deciding whether protistans are cells. Philos. Sci. 26, 
338–346. doi: 10.1086/287688
Gremiaux, A., Yokawa, K., Mancuso, S., and Baluska, F. (2014). Plant anesthesia 
supports similarities between animals and plants: Claude Bernard’s forgotten 
studies. Plant Signal. Behav. 9:e27886. doi: 10.4161/psb.27886
Grossberg, S. (1978). “Communication, memory, and development” in Progress 
in theoretical biology. eds. R. Rosen and F. Snell (New York: Academic Press).
Haig, D., and Dennett, D. (2017). Haig’s ‘strange inversion of reasoning’ and 
Making sense: information interpreted as meaning [Preprint]. Avilable at: 
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/13259/
Heams, T. (2012). Selection within organisms in the nineteenth century: Wilhelm 
Roux’s complex legacy. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 110, 24–33. doi: 10.1016/j.
pbiomolbio.2012.04.004
Hernandez-Diaz, S., and Levin, M. (2014). Alteration of bioelectrically-controlled 
processes in the embryo: a teratogenic mechanism for anticonvulsants. Reprod. 
Toxicol. 47, 111–114. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2014.04.008
Herrera-Delgado, E., Perez-Carrasco, R., Briscoe, J., and Sollich, P. (2018). 
Memory functions reveal structural properties of gene regulatory networks. 
PLoS Comput. Biol. 14:e1006003. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006003
Herrera-Rincon, C., Golding, A. S., Moran, K. M., Harrison, C., Martyniuk, C. J., 
Guay, J. A., et al. (2018). Brief local application of progesterone via a wearable 
bioreactor induces long-term regenerative response in adult Xenopus hindlimb. 
Cell Rep. 25, 1593–1609.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.10.010
Herrera-Rincon, C., and Levin, M. (2018). Booting up the organism during development: 
pre-behavioral functions of the vertebrate brain in guiding body morphogenesis. 
Commun. Integr. Biol. 11:e1433440. doi: 10.1080/19420889.2018.1433440
Herrera-Rincon, C., Pai, V. P., Moran, K. M., Lemire, J. M., and Levin, M. (2017). 
The brain is required for normal muscle and nerve patterning during early 
Xenopus development. Nat. Commun. 8:587. doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00597-2
Hoel, E. P., Albantakis, L., Marshall, W., and Tononi, G. (2016). Can the macro 
beat the micro? Integrated information across spatiotemporal scales. Neurosci. 
Conscious. 2016:niw012. doi: 10.1093/nc/niw012
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
21 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
Hoel, E. P., Albantakis, L., and Tononi, G. (2013). Quantifying causal emergence 
shows that macro can beat micro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 19790–19795. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1314922110
Hofstadter, D. R. (1979). Godel, Escher, Bach: an eternal golden braid. New 
York: Basic Books.
Humphries, J., Xiong, L., Liu, J., Prindle, A., Yuan, F., Arjes, H. A., et al. 
(2017). Species-independent attraction to biofilms through electrical signaling. 
Cell 168:e212. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.014
Hutchinson, J. F., and Sharp, R. (2008). Karma, reincarnation, and medicine: 
Hindu perspectives on biomedical research. Genomic Med. 2, 107–111. doi: 
10.1007/s11568-009-9079-4
Huxley, T. H. (1852). “Upon animal individuality” in The scientific memoirs of 
Thomas Henri Huxley. eds. M. Foster and W. R. Lankester (London: Macmillan), 
146–151.
Illmensee, K., and Mintz, B. (1976). Totipotency and normal differentiation of 
single teratocarcinoma cells cloned by injection into blastocysts. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 73, 549–553.
Jaeger, J., Irons, D., and Monk, N. (2008). Regulative feedback in pattern 
formation: towards a general relativistic theory of positional information. 
Development 135, 3175–3183. doi: 10.1242/dev.018697
Jaeger, J., and Monk, N. (2014). Bioattractors: dynamical systems theory and 
the evolution of regulatory processes. J. Physiol. 592, 2267–2281. doi: 10.1113/
jphysiol.2014.272385
Jayaram, D. T., Luo, Q., Thourson, S. B., Finlay, A. H., and Payne, C. K. 
(2017). Controlling the resting membrane potential of cells with conducting 
polymer microwires. Small 13. doi: 10.1002/smll.201700789
Jekely, G., Keijzer, F., and Godfrey-Smith, P. (2015). An option space for early 
neural evolution. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 370:pii: 20150181. 
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2015.0181
Josipovic, Z. (2014). Neural correlates of nondual awareness in meditation. 
Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1307, 9–18. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12261
Josipovic, Z. (2019). Nondual awareness: consciousness-as-such as non-representational 
reflexivity. Prog. Brain Res. 244, 273–298. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2018.10.021
Juel, B. E., Comolatti, R., Tononi, G., and Albantakis, L. (2019). When is an 
action caused from within? Quantifying the causal chain leading to actions 
in simulated agents. arXiv e-prints [Preprint]. Available at: https://ui.adsabs.
harvard.edu/abs/2019arXiv190402995J (Accessed April 01, 2019).
Kasemeier-Kulesa, J. C., Teddy, J. M., Postovit, L. M., Seftor, E. A., Seftor, R. E., 
Hendrix, M. J., et al. (2008). Reprogramming multipotent tumor cells with 
the embryonic neural crest microenvironment. Dev. Dyn. 237, 2657–2666. doi: 
10.1002/dvdy.21613
Katz, Y. (2018). Embodying probabilistic inference in biochemical circuits. ArXiv 
[Preprint]. eprint arXiv:1806.10161.
Katz, Y., Goodman, N. D., Kersting, K., Kemp, C., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2018). 
Modeling semantic cognition as logical dimensionality reduction. Computer Science 
and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Katz, Y., and Springer, M. (2016). Probabilistic adaptation in changing microbial 
environments. PeerJ 4:e2716. doi: 10.7717/peerj.2716
Kauffman, S. A. (1993). The origins of order: Self organization and selection in 
evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Keijzer, F., Van Duijn, M., and Lyon, P. (2013). What nervous systems do: 
early evolution, input-output, and the skin brain thesis. Adapt. Behav. 21, 
67–85. doi: 10.1177/1059712312465330
Kingsbury, L., Huang, S., Wang, J., Gu, K., Golshani, P., Wu, Y. E., et al. 
(2019). Correlated neural activity and encoding of behavior across brains 
of socially interacting animals. Cell 178, 429–446. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.022
Klein, B., and Hoel, E. (2019). Uncertainty and causal emergence in complex 
networks. arXiv e-prints [Preprint]. Available: https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/
abs/2019arXiv190703902K (Accessed July 01, 2019).
Koch, R., Kupczok, A., Stucken, K., Ilhan, J., Hammerschmidt, K., and Dagan, T. 
(2017). Plasticity first: molecular signatures of a complex morphological 
trait in filamentous cyanobacteria. BMC Evol. Biol. 17:209. doi: 10.1186/
s12862-017-1053-5
Kolchinsky, A., and Wolpert, D. H. (2018). Semantic information, agency, and 
nonequilibrium statistical physics. arXiv. [Preprint].
Koshland, D. E. (1983). The bacterium as a model neuron. Trends Neurosci. 
6, 133–137. doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(83)90066-8
Kourilsky, P. (2012). Selfish cellular networks and the evolution of complex 
organisms. C. R. Biol. 335, 169–179. doi: 10.1016/j.crvi.2012.01.003
Kouvaris, K., Clune, J., Kounios, L., Brede, M., and Watson, R. A. (2017). 
How evolution learns to generalise: using the principles of learning theory 
to understand the evolution of developmental organisation. PLoS Comput. 
Biol. 13:e1005358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005358
Krakauer, D., Bertschinger, N., Olbrich, E., Ay, N., and Flack, J. C. (2014). 
The 
information 
theory 
of 
individuality. 
ArXiv 
[Preprint]. 
eprint 
arXiv:1412.2447.
Kulesa, P. M., Kasemeier-Kulesa, J. C., Teddy, J. M., Margaryan, N. V., Seftor, E. A., 
Seftor, R. E., et al. (2006). Reprogramming metastatic melanoma cells to assume 
a neural crest cell-like phenotype in an embryonic microenvironment. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 3752–3757. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0506977103
Kull, K. (2000). Active motion, communicative aggregations, and the spatial 
closure 
of 
Umwelt. 
Ann. 
N. 
Y. 
Acad. 
Sci. 
901, 
272–279. 
doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06286.x
Langton, C. G. (1995). Artificial life: An overview. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Lee, D. D., Prindle, A., Liu, J., and Suel, G. M. (2017). SnapShot: electrochemical 
communication in biofilms. Cell 170:e211. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.026
Levin, M. (2003). Motor protein control of ion flux is an early step in embryonic 
left-right asymmetry. BioEssays 25, 1002–1010. doi: 10.1002/bies.10339
Levin, M. (2006). Is the early left-right axis like a plant, a kidney, or a neuron? 
The integration of physiological signals in embryonic asymmetry. Birth 
Defects Res. C Embryo Today 78, 191–223. doi: 10.1002/bdrc.20078
Levin, M. (2011). The wisdom of the body: future techniques and approaches 
to morphogenetic fields in regenerative medicine, developmental biology 
and cancer. Regen. Med. 6, 667–673. doi: 10.2217/rme.11.69
Levin, M. (2012). Morphogenetic fields in embryogenesis, regeneration, and 
cancer: non-local control of complex patterning. Bio Systems 109, 243–261. 
doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2012.04.005
Levin, M. (2014). Molecular bioelectricity: how endogenous voltage potentials 
control cell behavior and instruct pattern regulation in vivo. Mol. Biol. Cell 
25, 3835–3850. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e13-12-0708
Levin, M., and Martyniuk, C. J. (2018). The bioelectric code: an ancient 
computational medium for dynamic control of growth and form. Biosystems 
164, 76–93. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2017.08.009
Levin, M., Pezzulo, G., and Finkelstein, J. M. (2017). Endogenous bioelectric 
signaling networks: exploiting voltage gradients for control of growth and 
form. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 19, 353–387. doi: 10.1146/annurev-
bioeng-071114-040647
Levin, M., Pietak, A. M., and Bischof, J. (2018). Planarian regeneration as a 
model of anatomical homeostasis: recent progress in biophysical and 
computational approaches. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 87, 125–144. doi: 10.1016/j.
semcdb.2018.04.003
Levin, M., Thorlin, T., Robinson, K. R., Nogi, T., and Mercola, M. (2002). 
Asymmetries in H+/K+-ATPase and cell membrane potentials comprise a 
very early step in left-right patterning. Cell 111, 77–89. doi: 10.1016/
S0092-8674(02)00939-X
Liebeskind, B. J., Hillis, D. M., and Zakon, H. H. (2011). Evolution of sodium 
channels predates the origin of nervous systems in animals. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 108, 9154–9159. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1106363108
Liebeskind, B. J., Hillis, D. M., and Zakon, H. H. (2012). Phylogeny unites animal 
sodium leak channels with fungal calcium channels in an ancient, voltage-
insensitive clade. Mol. Biol. Evol. 29, 3613–3616. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mss182
Liu, Z., Liu, Y., Zhao, B., Du, L., Xia, Z., Chen, X., et al. (2012). The gap 
junction blocker carbenoxolone enhances propofol and sevoflurane-induced 
loss of consciousness. Neural Regen. Res. 7, 492–495. doi: 10.3969/j.
issn.1673-5374.2012.07.002
Liu, J., Martinez-Corral, R., Prindle, A., Lee, D. D., Larkin, J., Gabalda-Sagarra, M., 
et al. (2017). Coupling between distant biofilms and emergence of nutrient 
time-sharing. Science 356, 638–642. doi: 10.1126/science.aah4204
Lobikin, M., Chernet, B., Lobo, D., and Levin, M. (2012). Resting potential, 
oncogene-induced tumorigenesis, and metastasis: the bioelectric basis of 
cancer in vivo. Phys. Biol. 9:065002. doi: 10.1088/1478-3975/9/6/065002
Lobikin, M., Lobo, D., Blackiston, D. J., Martyniuk, C. J., Tkachenko, E., and 
Levin, M. (2015). Serotonergic regulation of melanocyte conversion: a 
bioelectrically regulated network for stochastic all-or-none hyperpigmentation. 
Sci. Signal. 8:ra99. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aac6609
Lobo, D., Solano, M., Bubenik, G. A., and Levin, M. (2014). A linear-encoding 
model explains the variability of the target morphology in regeneration. J. R. 
Soc. Interface 11:20130918. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2013.0918
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
22 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
Loeb, J. (1916). The organism as a whole from a physiochemical viewpoint. New 
York: Putnam.
Loeb, J. (1937). The biological basis of individuality. Science 86, 1–5. doi: 
10.1126/science.86.2218.1
Lopez Garcia De Lomana, A., Kaur, A., Turkarslan, S., Beer, K. D.,  
Mast, F. D., Smith, J. J., et al. (2017). Adaptive prediction emerges over 
short evolutionary time scales. Genome Biol. Evol. 9, 1616–1623. doi: 10.1093/
gbe/evx116
Luisi, P. L. (2014). The minimal autopoietic unit. Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 44, 
335–338. doi: 10.1007/s11084-014-9388-z
Lyon, P. (2006). The biogenic approach to cognition. Cogn. Process. 7, 11–29. 
doi: 10.1007/s10339-005-0016-8
Lyon, P. (2015). The cognitive cell: bacterial behavior reconsidered. Front. 
Microbiol. 6:264. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00264
Maier, L., Pruteanu, M., Kuhn, M., Zeller, G., Telzerow, A., Anderson, E. E., 
et al. (2018). Extensive impact of non-antibiotic drugs on human gut bacteria. 
Nature 555, 623–628. doi: 10.1038/nature25979
Man, K., and Damasio, A. (2019). Homeostasis and soft robotics in the design 
of feeling machines. Nat. Machine Intell. 1, 446–452. doi: 10.1038/s42256-019-0103-7
Mantz, J., Cordier, J., and Giaume, C. (1993). Effects of general anesthetics on 
intercellular communications mediated by gap junctions between astrocytes 
in primary culture. Anesthesiology 78, 892–901. doi: 10.1097/00000542- 
199305000-00014
Mar, R. A., Kelley, W. M., Heatherton, T. F., and Macrae, C. N. (2007). Detecting 
agency from the biological motion of veridical vs animated agents. Soc. 
Cogn. Affect. Neurosci. 2, 199–205. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsm011
Mathews, J., and Levin, M. (2017). Gap junctional signaling in pattern regulation: 
physiological network connectivity instructs growth and form. Dev. Neurobiol. 
77, 643–673. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22405
Mathews, J., and Levin, M. (2018). The body electric 2.0: recent advances in 
developmental bioelectricity for regenerative and synthetic bioengineering. 
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 52, 134–144. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2018.03.008
Maturana, H. R., and Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization 
of the living. Dordrecht, Holland, Boston: D. Reidel Pub. Co.
Maynard Smith, J., and Szathmáry, E. (1995). The major transitions in evolution. 
Oxford, New  York: W.H. Freeman Spektrum.
McCulloch, W. S. (1951). “Why the mind is in the head?” in Cerebral mechanisms 
in behavior: The Hixon symposium. ed. L. A. Jeffress (New York: Wiley), 42–81.
Mcgregor, S., Vasas, V., Husbands, P., and Fernando, C. (2012). Evolution of 
associative learning in chemical networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 8:e1002739. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002739
Mclaughlin, K. A., and Levin, M. (2018). Bioelectric signaling in regeneration: 
mechanisms of ionic controls of growth and form. Dev. Biol. 433, 177–189. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2017.08.032
McShea, D. W. (2012). Upper-directed systems: a new approach to teleology 
in biology. Biol. Philos. 27, 663–684. doi: 10.1007/s10539-012-9326-2
McShea, D. W. (2013). Machine wanting. Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. Biomed. Sci. 
44, 679–687. doi: 10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.05.015
McShea, D. W. (2016). Freedom and purpose in biology. Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. 
Biomed. Sci. 58, 64–72. doi: 10.1016/j.shpsc.2015.12.002
Michod, R. E. (2007). Evolution of individuality during the transition from 
unicellular to multicellular life. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104(Suppl. 1), 
8613–8618. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0701489104
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., and Pribram, K. H. (1960). Plans and the structure 
of behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
 Miller, W. B. Jr., Torday, J. S., and Baluska, F. (2018). Biological evolution as 
defense of ‘self’. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 142, 54–74. doi: 10.1016/j.
pbiomolbio.2018.10.002
Mintz, B., and Illmensee, K. (1975). Normal genetically mosaic mice produced 
from malignant teratocarcinoma cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 72, 3585–3589.
Mitchell, A., and Lim, W. (2016). Cellular perception and misperception: internal 
models for decision-making shaped by evolutionary experience. BioEssays 
38, 845–849. doi: 10.1002/bies.201600090
Molnar-Szakacs, I., and Uddin, L. Q. (2013). Self-processing and the default 
mode network: interactions with the mirror neuron system. Front. Hum. 
Neurosci. 7:571. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00571
Moore, D., Walker, S. I., and Levin, M. (2017). Cancer as a disorder of patterning 
information: computational and biophysical perspectives on the cancer 
problem. Conver. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 3:043001. doi: 10.1088/2057-1739/aa8548
Morgan, T. H. (1901). Regeneration of proportionate structures in Stentor. Biol. 
Bull. 2, 311–328. doi: 10.2307/1535709
Morimoto, B. H., and Koshland, D. E. J. (1991). Short-term and long-term 
memory in single cells. FASEB J. 5, 2061–2067. doi: 10.1096/fasebj.5.7.2010059
Mossbridge, J., Tressoldi, P., and Utts, J. (2012). Predictive physiological anticipation 
preceding seemingly unpredictable stimuli: a meta-analysis. Front. Psychol. 
3:390. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00390
Murase, K., and Asakura, T. (2003). Dynamic systems approach for embodiment 
and sociality: From ecological psychology to robotics. Adelaide: Advanced 
Knowledge International.
Murray, R. J., Debbane, M., Fox, P. T., Bzdok, D., and Eickhoff, S. B. (2015). 
Functional connectivity mapping of regions associated with self- and other-
processing. Hum. Brain Mapp. 36, 1304–1324. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22703
Nagel, E. (1979). Teleology revisited and other essays in the philosophy and 
history of science. New York: Columbia University Press.
Nilius, B., and Honore, E. (2012). Sensing pressure with ion channels. Trends 
Neurosci. 35, 477–486. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2012.04.002
Novák, B., and Bentrup, F. W. (1972). An electrophysiological study of regeneration 
in Acetabularia mediterranea. Planta 108, 227–244. doi: 10.1007/BF00384111
Oizumi, M., Tsuchiya, N., and Amari, S. I. (2016). Unified framework for 
information integration based on information geometry. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 113, 14817–14822. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1603583113
Oppenheimer, B. S., Oppenheimer, E. T., Stout, A. P., and Danishefsky, I. 
(1953). Malignant tumors resulting from embedding plastics in rodents. 
Science 118, 305–306. doi: 10.1126/science.118.3063.305
Oviedo, N. J., and Beane, W. S. (2009). Regeneration: the origin of cancer or a 
possible cure? Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 20, 557–564. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2009.04.005
Oviedo, N. J., Morokuma, J., Walentek, P., Kema, I. P., Gu, M. B., Ahn, J. M., 
et al. (2010). Long-range neural and gap junction protein-mediated cues 
control polarity during planarian regeneration. Dev. Biol. 339, 188–199. doi: 
10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.012
Pai, V. P., Aw, S., Shomrat, T., Lemire, J. M., and Levin, M. (2012). Transmembrane 
voltage potential controls embryonic eye patterning in Xenopus laevis. 
Development 139, 313–323. doi: 10.1242/dev.073759
Pais-Vieira, M., Lebedev, M., Kunicki, C., Wang, J., and Nicolelis, M. A. (2013). 
A brain-to-brain interface for real-time sharing of sensorimotor information. 
Sci. Rep. 3:1319. doi: 10.1038/srep01319
Palacios-Prado, N., and Bukauskas, F. F. (2009). Heterotypic gap junction channels 
as voltage-sensitive valves for intercellular signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA 106, 14855–14860. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0901923106
Palanivelu, R., and Preuss, D. (2000). Pollen tube targeting and axon guidance: 
parallels in tip growth mechanisms. Trends Cell Biol. 10, 517–524. doi: 
10.1016/S0962-8924(00)01849-3
Paul, C. D., Shea, D. J., Mahoney, M. R., Chai, A., Laney, V., Hung, W. C., 
et al. (2016). Interplay of the physical microenvironment, contact guidance, 
and intracellular signaling in cell decision making. FASEB J. 30, 2161–2170. 
doi: 10.1096/fj.201500199R
Perkins, M. L., Benzinger, D., Arcak, M., and Khammash, M. (2019). Cell-in-
the-loop pattern formation with optogenetically emulated cell-to-cell signaling. 
679597. bioRxiv [Preprint].
Perkins, T. J., and Swain, P. S. (2009). Strategies for cellular decision-making. 
Mol. Syst. Biol. 5:326. doi: 10.1038/msb.2009.83
Peters, A., Mcewen, B. S., and Friston, K. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: why 
it causes diseases and how it is mastered by the brain. Prog. Neurobiol. 
156, 164–188. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2017.05.004
Pezzulo, G., and Castelfranchi, C. (2009). Intentional action: from anticipation to 
goal-directed behavior. Psychol. Res. 73, 437–440. doi: 10.1007/s00426-009-0241-3
Pezzulo, G., and Levin, M. (2015). Re-membering the body: applications of 
computational neuroscience to the top-down control of regeneration of 
limbs and other complex organs. Integr. Biol. 7, 1487–1517. doi: 10.1039/
C5IB00221D
Pezzulo, G., and Levin, M. (2016). Top-down models in biology: explanation 
and control of complex living systems above the molecular level. J. R. Soc. 
Interface 13, pii: 20160555. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2016.0555
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. (2015). Active inference, homeostatic 
regulation and adaptive behavioural control. Prog. Neurobiol. 134, 17–35. 
doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.001
Pfeifer, R., Bongard, J., and Grand, S. (2007a). How the body shapes the way 
we  think: A new view of intelligence. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
23 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
Pfeifer, R., and Gomez, G. (2009). Morphological computation  - connecting 
brain, body, and environment. Creat. Brain-Like Intell. 5436, 66–83. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-00616-6_5
Pfeifer, R., Lungarella, M., and Iida, F. (2007b). Self-organization, embodiment, 
and biologically inspired robotics. Science 318, 1088–1093. doi: 10.1126/
science.1145803
Pietak, A., and Levin, M. (2017). Bioelectric gene and reaction networks: 
computational modelling of genetic, biochemical and bioelectrical dynamics 
in pattern regulation. J. R. Soc. Interface 14, pii: 20170425. doi: 10.1098/
rsif.2017.0425
Pietak, A., and Levin, M. (2018). Bioelectrical control of positional information 
in development and regeneration: a review of conceptual and computational 
advances. 
Prog. 
Biophys. 
Mol. 
Biol. 
137, 
52–68. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.
pbiomolbio.2018.03.008
Pinet, K., and Mclaughlin, K. A. (2019). Mechanisms of physiological tissue 
remodeling in animals: manipulating tissue, organ, and organism morphology. 
Dev. Biol. 451, 134–145. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2019.04.001
Power, D. A., Watson, R. A., Szathmary, E., Mills, R., Powers, S. T.,  
Doncaster, C. P., et al. (2015). What can ecosystems learn? Expanding 
evolutionary ecology with learning theory. Biol. Direct 10:69. doi: 10.1186/
s13062-015-0094-1
Powers, W. T. (1973). Behavior: The control of perception. Chicago: Aldine  
Pub. Co.
Pradeu, T. (2012). The limits of the self immunology and biological identity. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Pradeu, T. (2016). Organisms or biological individuals? Combining physiological 
and evolutionary individuality. Biol. Philos. 31, 797–817. doi: 10.1007/
s10539-016-9551-1
Pradeu, T., and Carosella, E. D. (2006). The self model and the conception 
of biological identity in immunology. Biol. Philos. 21, 235–252. doi: 10.1007/
s10539-005-8621-6
Prentice-Mott, H. V., Meroz, Y., Carlson, A., Levine, M. A., Davidson, M. W., 
Irimia, D., et al. (2016). Directional memory arises from long-lived cytoskeletal 
asymmetries in polarized chemotactic cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 
1267–1272. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1513289113
Prigogine, I. (1980). From being to becoming: Time and complexity in the physical 
sciences. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Prindle, A., Liu, J., Asally, M., Ly, S., Garcia-Ojalvo, J., and Suel, G. M. (2015). 
Ion channels enable electrical communication in bacterial communities. 
Nature 527, 59–63. doi: 10.1038/nature15709
Queller, D. C., and Strassmann, J. E. (2009). Beyond society: the evolution of 
organismality. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 364, 3143–3155. 
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2009.0095
Ramesh, S. A., Tyerman, S. D., Xu, B., Bose, J., Kaur, S., Conn, V., et al. 
(2015). GABA signalling modulates plant growth by directly regulating the 
activity of plant-specific anion transporters. Nat. Commun. 6:7879. doi: 
10.1038/ncomms9293
Ramstead, M. J. D., Constant, A., Badcock, P. B., and Friston, K. J. (2019). 
Variational ecology and the physics of sentient systems. Phys. Life Rev. pii: 
S1571-0645(19)30003-X. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2018.12.002 [Epub ahead of print].
Reid, C. R., Beekman, M., Latty, T., and Dussutour, A. (2013). Amoeboid 
organism uses extracellular secretions to make smart foraging decisions. 
Behav. Ecol. 24, 812–818. doi: 10.1093/beheco/art032
Reid, C. R., Macdonald, H., Mann, R. P., Marshall, J. A., Latty, T., and Garnier, S. 
(2016). Decision-making without a brain: how an amoeboid organism solves 
the two-armed bandit. J. R. Soc. Interface 13, pii: 20160030. doi: 10.1098/
rsif.2016.0030
Roper, K. (2013). Supracellular actomyosin assemblies during development. 
BioArchitecture 3, 45–49. doi: 10.4161/bioa.25339
Rosen, R. (1985). Anticipatory systems: Philosophical, mathematical, and 
methodological foundations. Oxford, England, New  York: Pergamon Press.
Rosenblueth, A., Wiener, N., and Bigelow, J. (1943). Behavior, purpose, and 
teleology. Philos. Sci. 10, 18–24. doi: 10.1086/286788
Rubenstein, M., Cornejo, A., and Nagpal, R. (2014). Programmable self-assembly 
in a thousand-robot swarm. Science 345, 795–799. doi: 10.1126/science.1254295
Ruch, R. J., and Trosko, J. E. (2001). Gap-junction communication in chemical 
carcinogenesis. Drug Metab. Rev. 33, 117–124. doi: 10.1081/DMR-100000137
Ruse, M. (1989). Teleology in biology: is it a cause for concern? Trends Ecol. 
Evol. 4, 51–54. doi: 10.1016/0169-5347(89)90143-2
Saigusa, T., Tero, A., Nakagaki, T., and Kuramoto, Y. (2008). Amoebae anticipate 
periodic events. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100:018101. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett. 
100.018101
Sakiyama, T., and Gunji, Y. P. (2013). The Muller-Lyer illusion in ant foraging. 
PLoS One 8:e81714. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081714
Sakiyama, T., and Gunji, Y. P. (2016). The Kanizsa triangle illusion in foraging 
ants. Biosystems 142-143, 9–14. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2016.02.003
Sarto-Jackson, I., and Tomaska, L. (2016). How to bake a brain: yeast as a 
model neuron. Curr. Genet. 62, 347–370. doi: 10.1007/s00294-015-0554-2
Scherber, C., Aranyosi, A. J., Kulemann, B., Thayer, S. P., Toner, M., Iliopoulos, O., 
et al. (2012). Epithelial cell guidance by self-generated EGF gradients. Integr. 
Biol. 4, 259–269. doi: 10.1039/c2ib00106c
Schlosser, G., and Wagner, G. P. (2004). Modularity in development and evolution. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schreier, H. I., Soen, Y., and Brenner, N. (2017). Exploratory adaptation in 
large random networks. Nat. Commun. 8:14826. doi: 10.1038/ncomms14826
Schulkin, J., and Sterling, P. (2019). Allostasis: a brain-centered, predictive mode 
of physiological regulation. Trends Neurosci. 42, 740–752. doi: 10.1016/j.
tins.2019.07.010
Seeley, T. D. (2009). The wisdom of the hive. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Sengupta, B., Tozzi, A., Cooray, G. K., Douglas, P. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). 
Towards a neuronal gauge theory. PLoS Biol. 14:e1002400. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pbio.1002400
Seoane, L. F., and Sole, R. V. (2018). Information theory, predictability and the 
emergence of complex life. R. Soc. Open Sci. 5:172221. doi: 10.1098/rsos.172221
Shemesh, H., Ovadia, O., and Novoplansky, A. (2010). Anticipating future 
conditions via trajectory sensitivity. Plant Signal. Behav. 5, 1501–1503. doi: 
10.4161/psb.5.11.13660
Sherer, N. M. (2013). Long-distance relationships: do membrane nanotubes 
regulate cell-cell communication and disease progression? Mol. Biol. Cell 
24, 1095–1098. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e12-08-0622
Siccardi, S., and Adamatzky, A. (2017). “Models of computing on actin filaments” 
in Advances in unconventional computing: Volume 2: Prototypes, models and 
algorithms. ed. A. Adamatzky (Cham: Springer International Publishing), 
309–346.
Smythies, J. (2015). On the possible role of protein vibrations in information 
processing in the brain: three Russian dolls. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 8:38. doi: 
10.3389/fnmol.2015.00038
Sober, E. (1991). “Organism and the origin of self” in Organisms, individuals, 
and units of selection. ed. A. Tauber (Dordrecht: Kluwer), 273–296.
Soen, Y., Knafo, M., and Elgart, M. (2015). A principle of organization which 
facilitates broad Lamarckian-like adaptations by improvisation. Biol. Direct 
10:68. doi: 10.1186/s13062-015-0097-y
Sogabe, S., Hatleberg, W. L., Kocot, K. M., Say, T. E., Stoupin, D., Roper, K. E., 
et al. (2019). Pluripotency and the origin of animal multicellularity. Nature 
570, 519–522. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1290-4
Sonnenschein, C., and Soto, A. M. (2015). Cancer metastases: so close and 
so far. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 107:djv236. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv236
Soto, A. M., and Sonnenschein, C. (2013). Paradoxes in carcinogenesis: there 
is light at the end of that tunnel! Disruptive Sci. Technol. 1, 154–156. doi: 
10.1089/dst.2013.0008
Spencer, G. J., and Genever, P. G. (2003). Long-term potentiation in bone--a 
role for glutamate in strain-induced cellular memory? BMC Cell Biol. 4:9. 
doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-4-9
Stepp, N. (2009). Anticipation in feedback-delayed manual tracking of a chaotic 
oscillator. Exp. Brain Res. 198, 521–525. doi: 10.1007/s00221-009-1940-0
Stepp, N., and Turvey, M. T. (2010). On strong anticipation. Cogn. Syst. Res. 
11, 148–164. doi: 10.1016/j.cogsys.2009.03.003
Stockwell, S. R., Landry, C. R., and Rifkin, S. A. (2015). The yeast galactose 
network as a quantitative model for cellular memory. Mol. BioSyst. 11, 
28–37. doi: 10.1039/C4MB00448E
Stovold, J. H., and O’Keefe, S. E. M. (2017). “Associative memory in reaction-
diffusion chemistry” in Advances in unconventional computing, emergence, 
complexity and computation book series, Vol. 23, 141–165.
Strassmann, J. E., and Queller, D. C. (2010). The social organism: congresses, parties, 
and committees. Evolution 64, 605–616. doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00929.x
Sullivan, K. G., Emmons-Bell, M., and Levin, M. (2016). Physiological inputs 
regulate species-specific anatomy during embryogenesis and regeneration. 
Commun. Integr. Biol. 9:e1192733. doi: 10.1080/19420889.2016.1192733
Levin 
Computational Boundary of the Self
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 
24 
December 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 2688
Sullivan, K. G., and Levin, M. (2016). Neurotransmitter signaling pathways 
required for normal development in Xenopus laevis embryos: a pharmacological 
survey screen. J. Anat. 229, 483–502. doi: 10.1111/joa.12467
Sundelacruz, S., Levin, M., and Kaplan, D. L. (2009). Role of membrane potential 
in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation. Stem Cell Rev. 
Rep. 5, 231–246. doi: 10.1007/s12015-009-9080-2
Szabó, Á., Vattay, G., and Kondor, D. (2012). A cell signaling model as a 
trainable neural nanonetwork. Nano Commun. Net. 3, 57–64. doi: 10.1016/j.
nancom.2012.01.002
Tani, I., Yamachiyo, M., Shirakawa, T., and Gunji, Y. P. (2014). Kanizsa illusory 
contours appearing in the plasmodium pattern of Physarum polycephalum. 
Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 4:10. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2014.00010
Tarnita, C. E., Taubes, C. H., and Nowak, M. A. (2013). Evolutionary construction 
by staying together and coming together. J. Theor. Biol. 320, 10–22. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtbi.2012.11.022
Tasneem, A., Iyer, L. M., Jakobsson, E., and Aravind, L. (2005). Identification 
of the prokaryotic ligand-gated ion channels and their implications for the 
mechanisms and origins of animal Cys-loop ion channels. Genome Biol. 
6:R4. doi: 10.1186/gb-2004-6-1-r4
Teufel, T. (2011). Wholes that cause their parts: organic self-reproduction and 
the reality of biological teleology. Stud. Hist. Phil. Biol. Biomed. Sci. 42, 
252–260. doi: 10.1016/j.shpsc.2010.12.002
Toettcher, J. E., Weiner, O. D., and Lim, W. A. (2013). Using optogenetics to 
interrogate the dynamic control of signal transmission by the Ras/Erk module. 
Cell 155, 1422–1434. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.004
Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional 
manifesto. Biol. Bull. 215, 216–242. doi: 10.2307/25470707
Tseng, A. S., Beane, W. S., Lemire, J. M., Masi, A., and Levin, M. (2010). 
Induction of vertebrate regeneration by a transient sodium current. J. Neurosci. 
30, 13192–13200. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3315-10.2010
Turner, J. S. (2011). Termites as models of swarm cognition. Swarm Intell. 5, 
19–43. doi: 10.1007/s11721-010-0049-1
Turner, J. S. (2016). Semiotics of a Superorganism. Biosemiotics 9, 85–102. doi: 
10.1007/s12304-016-9256-5
Turner, C. H., Robling, A. G., Duncan, R. L., and Burr, D. B. (2002). Do 
bone cells behave like a neuronal network? Calcif. Tissue Int. 70, 435–442. 
doi: 10.1007/s00223-001-1024-z
Van Duijn, M., Keijzer, F., and Franken, D. (2006). Principles of minimal 
cognition: casting cognition as sensorimotor coordination. Adapt. Behav. 
14, 157–170. doi: 10.1177/105971230601400207
Van Houten, J. (1979). Membrane potential changes during chemokinesis in 
paramecium. Science 204, 1100–1103. doi: 10.1126/science.572085
Vandenberg, L. N., Adams, D. S., and Levin, M. (2012). Normalized shape 
and location of perturbed craniofacial structures in the Xenopus tadpole 
reveal an innate ability to achieve correct morphology. Dev. Dyn. 241, 
863–878. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23770
Varela, F. G., Maturana, H. R., and Uribe, R. (1974). Autopoiesis: the organization 
of living systems, its characterization and a model. Curr. Mod. Biol. 5, 
187–196. doi: 10.1016/0303-2647(74)90031-8
Vergassola, M., Villermaux, E., and Shraiman, B. I. (2007). 'Infotaxis' as a strategy 
for searching without gradients. Nature 445, 406–409. doi: 10.1038/nature05464
Vesty, E. F., Saidi, Y., Moody, L. A., Holloway, D., Whitbread, A., Needs, S., et al. 
(2016). The decision to germinate is regulated by divergent molecular networks 
in spores and seeds. New Phytol. 211, 952–966. doi: 10.1111/nph.14018
Vieira, W. A., and Mccusker, C. D. (2019). Hierarchical pattern formation 
during amphibian limb regeneration. Biosystems 183:103989. doi: 10.1016/j.
biosystems.2019.103989
Vladimirov, N., and Sourjik, V. (2009). Chemotaxis: how bacteria use memory. 
Biol. Chem. 390, 1097–1104. doi: 10.1515/BC.2009.130
Vogel, D., and Dussutour, A. (2016). Direct transfer of learned behaviour via 
cell fusion in non-neural organisms. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 283, pii: 
20162382. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2016.2382
Wagner, G. P., Erkenbrack, E. M., and Love, A. C. (2019). Stress-induced 
evolutionary innovation: a mechanism for the origin of cell types. BioEssays 
41:e1800188. doi: 10.1002/bies.201800188
Wagner, G. P., Pavlicev, M., and Cheverud, J. M. (2007). The road to modularity. 
Nat. Rev. Genet. 8, 921–931. doi: 10.1038/nrg2267
Walker, S. I., and Davies, P. C. (2013). The algorithmic origins of life. J. R. 
Soc. Interface 10:20120869. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2012.0869
Walker, S. I., Kim, H., and Davies, P. C. (2016). The informational architecture 
of the cell. Philos. Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 374, pii: 20150057. doi: 
10.1098/rsta.2015.0057
Wang, X., Veruki, M. L., Bukoreshtliev, N. V., Hartveit, E., and Gerdes, H. H. 
(2010). Animal cells connected by nanotubes can be  electrically coupled 
through interposed gap-junction channels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 
17194–17199. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1006785107
Watson, R. A., Buckley, C. L., Mills, R., and Davies, A. (2010). “Associative memory 
in gene regulation networks” in Artificial Life Conference XII (Cambridge: MIT 
Press), 194–201.
Watson, R. A., and Szathmary, E. (2016). How can evolution learn? Trends 
Ecol. Evol. 31, 147–157. doi: 10.1016/j.tree.2015.11.009
Weippert, M., Rickler, M., Kluck, S., Behrens, K., Bastian, M., Mau-Moeller, A., 
et al. (2018). It’s harder to push, when I  have to push hard-physical exertion 
and fatigue changes reasoning and decision-making on hypothetical moral 
dilemmas in males. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 12:268. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00268
Weiss, P. A. (1967). “1 + 1 =/= 2 (one plus one does not equal two)” in The 
neurosciences: A study program. eds. C. Q. Gardner and T. Melnechuk (New 
York: Rockefeller University Press), 801–821.
Wentlandt, K., Samoilova, M., Carlen, P. L., and El Beheiry, H. (2006). General 
anesthetics inhibit gap junction communication in cultured organotypic 
hippocampal slices. Anesth. Analg. 102, 1692–1698. doi: 10.1213/01.
ane.0000202472.41103.78
Werren, J. H. (2011). Selfish genetic elements, genetic conflict, and evolutionary 
innovation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108(Suppl. 2), 10863–10870. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1102343108
West, S. A., Fisher, R. M., Gardner, A., and Kiers, E. T. (2015). Major evolutionary 
transitions in individuality. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 10112–10119. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1421402112
Wiener, N. (1961). Cybernetics; or, control and communication in the animal 
and the machine. New York: M.I.T. Press.
Wilson, M. Z., Ravindran, P. T., Lim, W. A., and Toettcher, J. E. (2017). Tracing 
information flow from Erk to target gene induction reveals mechanisms of 
dynamic and combinatorial control. Mol. Cell 67:e755. doi: 10.1016/j.
molcel.2017.07.016
Yamasaki, H., Mesnil, M., Omori, Y., Mironov, N., and Krutovskikh, V. (1995). 
Intercellular communication and carcinogenesis. Mutat. Res. 333, 181–188. 
doi: 10.1016/0027-5107(95)00144-1
Zeng, Y., Lv, X., Zeng, S., and Shi, J. (2009). Activity-dependent neuronal 
control of gap-junctional communication in fibroblasts. Brain Res. 1280, 
13–22. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.05.037
Zhang, W., and Yartsev, M. M. (2019). Correlated neural activity across the 
brains of socially interacting bats. Cell 178, 413–428. doi: 10.1016/j.
cell.2019.05.023
Zhou, J. X., Cisneros, L., Knijnenburg, T., Trachana, K., Davies, P., and 
Huang, S. (2018a). Phylostratigraphic analysis of tumor and developmental 
transcriptomes reveals relationship between oncogenesis, phylogenesis and 
ontogenesis. Conver. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4:025002. doi: 10.1088/2057-1739/
aab1b0
Zhou, Y., Smith, B. H., and Sharpee, T. O. (2018b). Hyperbolic geometry of 
the olfactory space. Sci. Adv. 4:eaaq1458. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aaq1458
Zoghi, M. (2004). Cardiac memory: do the heart and the brain remember the 
same? J. Interv. Card. Electrophysiol. 11, 177–182. doi: 10.1023/B:JICE. 
0000048567.18088.a2
Conflict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Levin. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms 
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or 
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the 
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal 
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,  distribution or 
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these  terms.
