50 | MY LIVEABLE CITY • Jan-Mar 2023
CULTURE CORNER>Amstredam city
URBAN BLUEPRINT>Changing Cityscape
Mind in the City
Andrea Hiott takes us on a journey through our unique experiences of a public space
A
s many a New Yorker will tell you, autumn 
in the city brings magical moments. The 
air is crisp yet comfortable. Wearing 
a light jacket, you can walk all day, zigzag 
across avenues, stop by a café, perhaps step 
into a museum, experience the city as a shared 
landscape. Sultry summer streets have been 
rubbed clean by rainwater. Fall winds swirl 
through the rivers, estuaries, and freshwaters, 
giving the city a shoreside scent, reminding us 
that we’re on an island, just a stone’s throw from 
the Atlantic Ocean. Sunlight plays on the city’s 
red bricks, the whites of its marble, the silvers of 
its steel, casting the skyscraper-flanked streets in 
haloes rarely witnessed in other seasons. Days like 
this, just being outside makes you feel lucky and 
lifts your spirit.
Though it has been a while since I could call 
myself a New Yorker, I spent some time in the 
city recently, and mostly what I wanted to do 
Jan-Mar 2023 • MY LIVEABLE CITY | 51
Though many 
of a landscape’s 
affordances are 
shared, each 
person has 
affordances 
unique to them
there was walk. Walking, an activity capable of 
enhancing one’s environmental perception, is at 
the heart of the science of strollology as coined by 
Swiss sociologist Lucius Burckhardt. Walking is 
also a way of letting go of thought, merging with 
the wider flow, feeling one’s place in a communal 
ballet of which human activity is only a part.
Making my way across West 87th street 
towards Central Park on a sunny October 
day, all around me, the light and leaves were 
dancing. I walked beneath a canopy of street 
trees and past a community park — a quiet 
pocket of green where three people sat reading, 
two with steaming cups in their hands. As I 
reached Central Park, its green carpets rolled 
out before me, clearing my head of yesterday’s 
stress. I made my way around the Reservoir in a 
kaleidoscope of colour as the leaves of London 
Planes, American Elms and Black Tupelos 
exploded in the crimsons and golds of rebirth, 
their vivid bundles falling like silent fireworks.
After the loop, making my way back towards 
the street west of the Reservoir, my eyes fell 
upon something else, something new, a string of 
signs I’d never seen, offering information about 
a settlement known as Seneca Village, which 
was a thriving black community that existed on 
these same grounds in the 1800s. Seeing these 
signs for the first time, my body flooded with 
recognition. They were new to me — I’d not been 
in this part of the park since 2019, the year they 
were installed — but the story of Seneca Village 
was familiar. I’d heard about it well over a decade 
ago, from a friend I often walked weekends with 
here. I remember him well because he was one of 
the first to show me how a shared space could be 
sensed so differently. He saw this park in a way 
I did not, though we both loved it, because his 
father once told him stories of the free men and 
women, his ancestors, who’d established their 
successful, historic community here. “Where are 
the traces of them now?” he asked. They were 
nowhere to be seen back then, but today, perhaps 
even thanks to him, the history has become more 
visible, better acknowledged by this landscape, 
reflecting a wider change of thought.
As the day passed and I rambled through 
more of the city, I noticed other physical 
changes that were evidence of a change in our 
mental landscape — sidewalks that had been 
closed to cars and opened to pedestrians during 
the pandemic, restaurants turned inside out, 
overflowing with plants, partly overtaking the 
streets. All this had been instigated by the needs 
and desires of people living through a pandemic, a 
change in our mental state that reflected a change 
in our physical use of public spaces.
Burckhardt would have likely championed 
these urban changes prompted so immediately 
by citizens in need. After all, his notion of the 
science of strollology was partly meant as a 
critical reflection on urban development. He 
believed the planning and politics that go into 
the creation of cityscapes is often too removed 
from the people living in them. He was stringent 
in his call for participatory urban planning. He 
saw the citizens of a space as its experts and 
understood that an experience of place was also 
an experience of personal and communal history 
and development. It was, to use a term from 
psychologist J.J. Gibson, always an experience 
that depended upon ‘affordances’ — on a 
cumulative sense of the world, and on what that 
world allowed or afforded them. Though many 
of a landscape’s affordances are shared, each 
person has affordances unique to them and their 
experience, because each person has trodden a 
unique path.
CULTURE CORNER>Amstredam city
Affordances are opportunities for behaviour. 
They are the actions and potentials inherent in 
our environment, and though the environment 
is shared, what it affords a person depends on 
their history and development. The same space 
or object can afford very different actions. A 
baby will use a set of keys differently than an 
adult. An insect may see a log in the forest as 
lunch, while a human may approach it as a place 
to rest. I had one story of Central Park, while my 
friend had another.
We each experience the same city differently 
according to all we have experienced before, 
A city is an ongoing encounter of sensory 
regularities — shapes, sounds, colours, smells, 
touches — sensory regularities that shift in and 
out of one another, overlap and cohere into 
what Burkhardt (in Why is landscape beautiful?) 
calls a string of pearls: Each pearl is a cluster of 
sensory impressions, sensory regularities grouped 
into collections, be those restaurants, forests, 
churches, homes or the string of pearls we call 
Central Park. All these pearls are physical, but 
they are also social and mental. The pearl we call 
home is a physical place, but it is also an idea 
and a feeling. There is always something material 
and something imaginary to any place that has 
become meaningful, and though most sensory 
regularities are mostly shared, they are always 
framed according to our histories and affordances.
In other words, mental, social and physical 
landscapes are always co-creations and never 
neutral. The ways we design and access our cities 
and communities are also the ways we set the 
parameters of our potential mental and social 
affordances. The way we move through public 
spaces — how we find our way through a park, 
through our thoughts, or through a book — is a 
shared stroll on some level, a trajectory of the 
affordances we notice and champion, and of how 
we learn and share those affordances with others 
as we navigate. Working in urban ecology and 
landscape can also mean working in the fields of 
physical and mental health: Designing streets and 
urban forests, buildings and gardens, sidewalks 
and signage, also means designing potentials for 
memory, feeling, and thought, and for how we 
might connect minds and share paths in ways that 
stimulate and benefit the citizens living in them.
Part of good design, as Burckhardt saw it, 
is understanding this mental side of landscape 
and including spatial interventions, stimulating 
sensory elements to awaken and enhance our 
mental lives and knowledge. Signs such as those 
of Seneca Village are there to do just that, to alert 
one to another reading of a familiar landscape, 
but they can also be placed in such a way that 
even those who walk by them every day never see 
them. Every choice matters.
This brings up another of Burckhardt’s 
notions: a city’s invisible design, the idea that 
all landscapes are internal, that what gets built 
begins with mental parameters and confirms 
social ones. Just as the timetable of a bus stop or 
subway may dictate the hours of its nearby kiosk, 
or the size of a kitchen may determine who and 
how we gather, the design of a park may prompt 
us to wonder.
Cities awaken and stimulate our senses 
with their activity, their height and light and 
extremity, but they can also become sanctuaries 
of intimacy, health and connection, places with 
URBAN BLUEPRINT>Changing Cityscape
There is always 
something 
material and 
something 
imaginary to 
any place that 
has become 
meaningful
52 | MY LIVEABLE CITY • Jan-Mar 2023
Jan-Mar 2023 • MY LIVEABLE CITY | 53
What materials 
we use and how 
we arrange them 
matters for mind 
and body
and the city does well to acknowledge this. A 
market square is experienced one way by the 
vendor working long days there, and another by a 
shopper briefly stopping by, but each is important 
to the other’s lifeworld. As we move through 
our cities, we have unique affordances, unique 
readings, and not all spaces afford us equally. 
Urban design at its best — or so Burckhardt, 
Gibson and others have suggested — supports 
each unique stance while also prompting and 
instigating communal creation and discovery. 
It sets a rhythm to which all instruments can 
harmonise and improvise.
paths grounded and shaped around authentic 
connections that are consistent and dynamic. 
The physical bodies, objects and organics around 
us are raw material for the eventual scripts and 
patterns of our thoughts, feelings and memories; 
mental life is always nested within spatial 
experience, patterned by its affordances.
As Burckhardt and others like Henri Lefebvre 
— with his corresponding notions of l’espace 
conçu, l’espace perçu and l’espace vécu — have 
shown, landscapes are always physical, social and 
mental. They offer affordances for both minds 
and bodies. How those affordances affect our 
health depends on the trajectory of each person 
over time and those trajectories form the city’s 
communal ballet. Taking this seriously means 
remembering three touchstones for how we 
design, plan and access shared space:
1.History matters. It must be acknowledged. 
To understand what affordances are being given, 
accentuated, erased or saved, we must know one 
another’s stories and trajectories. That is true of 
all the forms of life that make up a city (plants, 
animals, insects, etc.), not only the human ones.
2. Sensory arrangement is never neutral. It 
always contributes (for good or ill) to both mental 
and physical health. What materials we use and 
how we arrange them matters for mind and body. 
Cities must take their sensory affordances into 
account, not only as means of navigating physical 
spaces but also as means of navigating and 
exploring mental ones.
3. Movement is the ultimate affordance. A 
primary concern of all urban design is how it 
allows us to move and what sort of movements 
it affords all its citizens. Can we walk with the 
autumn leaves and light without worrying about 
noise and traffic? Can we meet strangers in the 
streets? Are community stories scaffolded and 
given space to stretch?
Just as the memory of a song shares the 
patterns of its original music, other thoughts, 
feelings and memories share the patterns and 
resonances of the sensory landscapes in which 
they develop. How we shape the parameters of 
our cities is how we shape our senses and how 
we evolve and extend those senses individually 
and communally depends on what affordances 
we highlight or notice. Trees, homes, buildings, 
streets — these are landmarks of memory, 
knowledge, feeling and trust. They cue, trigger 
and set inner boundaries. 
Every aspect of the city is mental as much 
as physical. Nothing is neutral to our health. We 
cannot separate thoughts, feelings and memories 
from plants, bodies and bricks. When we design 
public spaces — be those physical, mental, or social 
— we design inner affordances. We are always 
creating inner landscapes alongside outer ones.
