the Picatrix 
The 
Occult 
C l a s s i c 
o f 
A s t r o l o g i c a l 
M a g i c C o m p l e t e 
in 
One 
V o l u m e 
Translated and Annotated by 
John 
Michael 
G r e e r 
a n d 
Christopher 
Warnock 
A D O C E N T Y N 
P r e s s 
Liber Rubeus Edition 
P i c a t r i x Liber Rubeus Edition 
Copyright © 2010-11 John Michael Greer & Christopher Warnock 
I S B N 978-1-257-77958'! 
All Rights Reserved 
Renaissance Astrology 
www.renaissanceastrology.com 
A d o c e n t y n 
P r e s s 
ffilrsscO lie ttiou Into is no ccoob, ano ciimcB lie t&cp tint BtcaU ft is boob! 
To Kathleen & Sara 
4 
C&e ^icatri^iLiber Uubeua Gftrttwn 
Contents 
Translators' Introduction 
n 
The Picatrix in Context 
12 
The Picatrix and the Necronomicon 
14 
Picatrix in Practice 
16 
A Note on the Text 
18 
Warning and Disclaimer 
19 
Prologue 
21 
Book One 
24 
Chapter One 
25 
How you may know your degree in the universe 
Chapter Two 
26 
What magic is and what its properties are 
Chapter Three 
30 
What the heavens are and what their substance is 
Chapter Four 
31 
The general theory and arrangement of the heavens for 
making magical images 
Chapter Five 
39 
Examples of the theory of images, and of those things 
needful for making magical images 
Chapter Six 
52 
In what degree everything exists in the universe and how it 
is known that man is a lesser world and corresponds to the 
greater world 
Chapter Seven 
55 
In what degree everything in the universe exists, and many 
other profound things, hidden by the wise, that we intend 
to reveal in this book of ours 
Content* 
Book Two 
Chapter One 
Howit is possible to learn this science 
Chapter Two 
The images of heaven and their secrets 
Chapter Three 
All the works of the planets, the Sun, and the Moon 
Chapter Four 
The motion of the eighth sphere and the fixed stars 
Chapter Five 
The division of this science among nations, and which part 
of it each nation possesses 
Chapter Six 
The virtues of images, and by what means they may be had, and 
how images may receive the powers of the planets, and ho w works 
are done by images, and this is the foundation of the science of 
magic and images 
Chapter Seven 
How to work dialectically in the science of magical images, 
and what part this ought to have in this science 
Chapter Eight 
The order of natural things, and how they may enter into this science 
Chapter Nine 
Examples of the figures and forms of images that call down 
the assistance of the planets 
Chapter Ten 
The stones proper to each planet and the formation of figures 
Chapter Eleven 
The images of the faces of the signs and their effects 
Chapter Twelve 
The figures and degrees of the signs and their effects according 
to the opinion of the Hindus, and how they proceed in the 
contemplations of this science, and in what manner the virtues 
of superior bodies are attracted according to the opinions of the 
6 
Cfje IHcatrij*-JUber Kubeu* Gftrition 
same, with notable secrets 
Book Three 
131 
Chapter One 
133 
The parts of the planets that exist in plants, animals and metals 
Chapter Two 
137 
O f the parts of the signs in the aforesaid three existences, 
that is, plants, animals, and minerals 
Chapter Three 
140 
O f the figures, colors, garments, and incenses of the planets, 
as well as the colors of the faces of the signs 
Chapter Four 
143 
Why the secrets of this science may not be understood except 
a little at a time 
Chapter Five 
143 
In which is demonstrated the virtue proper to animals and 
noteworthy things necessary in this science, and how the 
spirits of the planets are attracted by figures and suffumigations 
Chapter Six 
150 
The magistery of drawing planetary spirits with natural 
things, and what a magical image is and how it can have this power 
Chapter Seven 
154 
Attracting the virtues of the planets, and how we may speak 
with them, and how their influences are divided among planets, 
figures, sacrifices, prayers, suffumigations, and propositions; 
and the state of the heavens necessary to each planet 
Chapter Eight 
182 
The way of prayer with which the Nabateans used to pray to 
the Sun and Saturn, and how they would speak to them and their 
spirits and draw forth their influences 
Chapter Nine 
How to attract the powers of each planet and the powers of 
their spirits, naming them according to their parts, and how to 
accomplish this by speaking their names 
Content* 
7 
Chapter Ten 
192 
A demonstration of the confections of planetary spirits, and 
preventing dangers from ceremonies and effects, and of the 
wonders of magic, and of the food, suffumigations, unguents, 
and odors that one who invokes planetary spirits ought to use; 
and the proper effects, and works that are not done except in appearance 
Chapter Eleven 
204 
The effects of magical images in diverse things, as well as in 
alterations of sight, so that things are seen other than as they 
are; and causing sleep and waking, and making poisons and 
their remedies 
Chapter Twelve 
220 
Rules Necessary in this Science 
Book Four 
224 
Chapter One 
225 
By what virtue and force spirit proceeds, and what are the 
properties of spirits, bodies, sense, intellect, and soul, as well as the 
differences between them 
Chapter Two 
231 
What vigor the spirit of the Moon brings to this inferior world, 
and what ought to be done with each of the seven planets 
Chapter Three 
243 
What the Chaldeans held to be the profundities and secrets of this 
science, and what they said about it 
Chapter Four 
244 
The images and reasonings that greatly further this science 
Chapter Five 
254 
The ten sciences that are necessary to this art, and how this 
science is helped by them, and what is the foundation of the science of 
magic 
Chapter Six 
257 
How the suffumigations of the stars ought to be made, and 
certain compositions necessary to this science 
8 
IC&e iPteatriF-iltber Kubetia CDitlon 
Chapter Seven 
i 6 z 
The things of the magical art found in the book The Chaldean 
Agriculture which Abudaer Abemiaxie translated from the 
Chaldean language into Arabic 
Chapter Eight 
276 
The virtues of other things which Nature does by her own properties 
Chapter Nine 
281 
Images whose virtues perform marvels, that were found in a 
book that was discovered in the church of Coredib and the book 
of Queen Folopedre; and a description of all the rules necessary in 
working with magical images 
Glossary 
294 
Bibliography 
300 
Index 
302 
3ntrotutction 
Translators' Introduction 
n an age when such terms as "classic" are the everyday fare of advertising 
A copywriters, it is difficult to know how to introduce a genuine classic of 
^ J occult literature, but the book you hold in your hands is impossible to 
describe in any other way. Originally written sometime in the ninth century 
by an anonymous Arab wizard in North Africa or Spain, and credited in the 
fashion of the time to the notable Sufi and scholar al-Majriti, it was originally 
titled Ghayat al-Hakim, "The Goal of the Sage." 
Like so many works of Arabic occultism, it eventually found its way 
to Europe. It was translated into Spanish and Latin at the court of Alfonso 
the Wise, King of Castile, in the year 1256, and received the new title of 
Picatrix. Scholars to this day are uncertain what the name means. The 
explanation that seems most plausible is that it is the Latin version of an 
Arabic transliteration—perhaps Buqratis—of a Greek original; it is tempting, 
though unprovable, to suggest that the name may have been Harpocrates, 
the Hellenistic Egyptian god of silence and mystery. The Latin text makes the 
mystery more intriguing by claiming that Picatrix was the name of the book's 
author. 
The influence of Picatrix on the magical traditions of the western world 
was immense. Most of the significant scholarly occultists of the late Middle 
Ages appear to have drawn on it, or on material borrowed from it by other 
authors. Marsilio Ficino, whose translation of the Corpus Hermeticum 
launched the Renaissance occult revival, borrowed heavily from it for his 
pathbreaking Three Books on Life\ Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa's Three Books 
of Occult Philosophy was even more extensively influenced by Picatrix, and 
some of the leading figures in the English occult renaissance of the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries—Simon Forman, Elias Ashmole and William 
Lilly—used it as a primary source for their own magical work. With the end 
of the Renaissance and the rise of the scientific materialism that dominated 
seventeenth-century culture, however, Picatrix dropped from sight, and the 
revival of magic in the western world that began in the middle of the 19th 
century passed it by. Even today it remains the least known of the major 
works of western occultism. 
iz 
C&e i^catrif'itfber liiubeua Litton 
The Picatrix in Context 
o understand why Picatrix had so great an impact on its own 
time, and has been so thoroughly forgotten in ours, it needs to 
be recognized as the extraordinary work it is. It is not simply a 
collection of magical recipes and rituals, like the grimoires of a later period. 
Though it does contain plenty of detailed instructions in magical procedures, 
its central focus is philosophical; it is in fact the most extensive treatise 
on the philosophy of magic to be written anywhere west of India between 
Iamblichus' On the Mysteries of the fourth century and Cornelius Agrippa's 
Three Books of Occult Philosophy of the sixteenth. 
The philosophy that grounds the magic of Picatrix is the same theurgic 
Neoplatonism that fills both the books just mentioned, enriched—as 
Agrippa's work also was—by the astrological mysticism that played so 
large a role in the magical end of Neoplatonism after Iamblichus' time. To 
Neoplatonists, among them the author and a great many of the readers of 
Picatrix, the world was a hierarchy of levels of being, down which currents 
of influence cascaded from the divine unity at its summit. The work of the 
magician consisted of learning the ways of these currents, and drawing upon 
them to perform magical works when they were at their strongest. 
Picatrix was not simply a discussion of magical philosophy, however. It 
contained an immense body of practical occult lore that had been gathered 
up among Arab occultists over the two centuries or so before its anonymous 
author put pen to paper. The practices of Neoplatonist theurgy contributed 
a great deal to the collection, and so did the astral magic of Mesopotamia; 
there are also workings in Picatrix that show close affinities with the magic 
practiced in ancient Egypt, and others that are clearly borrowed from Hindu 
tradition. No other book on magic from the Middle Ages contains anything 
close to a comparable collection of magical technique 
Much of the magic taught in Picatrix, in addition, used a particular 
procedure that could be found in few other sources. That procedure seems 
to have determined the name used most often for magic in the Latin text, 
nigromantia, which literally means "black divination"—very nearly in the 
sense that a modern book on espionage might refer to acts of sabotage and 
the like as "black ops." Astrology, the principal method of divination in 
the medieval world, was generally considered even by theologians to be a 
legitimate and acceptable means of gathering information. What was not 
acceptable to the orthodox was any more active use of the subtle currents of 
influence that astrologers attempted to track, and this is exactly what Picatrix 
taught. Its "black divination" focused on making talismans at times precisely 
Jntroftiiction 
chosen for their astrological properties, so that a specific influence radiated 
thereafter from the talismans for good or ill. Unlike the later magic of the 
grimoires, these workings required little ceremony and made only limited 
use of divine names and words of power; their effectiveness came from the 
heavens. 
The audience of Picatrix differed from that of many other medieval 
occult texts as well, for its anonymous author states repeatedly that it is 
solely intended for the use of members of a particular profession of his time. 
The Latin text gives that profession the title sapiens; we have translated it 
"sage," but there is another English word perhaps even better suited to the 
connotations the author had in mind: "wizard." 
It is too rarely remembered that legendary figures such as Merlin, and 
their fictional equivalents such as J.R.R. Tolkien's Gandalf the Grey, reflect an 
authentic medieval phenomenon: the freelance occultist-scholar whose stock 
in trade was as much useful advice as magical powers, and who aspired—and 
very occasionally rose—to the position of councilor to kings. The author 
of Picatrix conveniently lists the qualifications for a sapiens in Book IV, 
chapter 5; they include a good working knowledge of the following topics: 
agriculture, seafaring, and politics; the military sciences; "the civilized arts 
by which people are helped," including grammar, languages, law, rhetoric, 
writing, and economics; the four traditional branches of mathematics— 
arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music; logic, with the works of 
Aristotle specifically singled out for study; medicine; the natural sciences, and 
metaphysics, with Aristotle's writings on these two subjects again specifically 
referenced. 
From a modern perspective, this very demanding curriculum may seem 
irrelevant to the work of a professional wizard. From within the worldview of 
the Middle Ages and Renaissance, it was essential. Whether he was earning 
a modest living by casting horary divinations in a marketplace or leading a 
privileged life in a royal court, a wizard's job was to provide sound advice 
to his clients. That advice would draw inspiration from astrology or one 
of the other scholarly methods of divination practiced at the time, such as 
geomancy, but it would also be informed by a broad education in very nearly 
the entire body of useful knowledge that had survived the decline and fall of 
the Roman world. 
Nor, of course, did anyone in the Middle Ages or Renaissance perceive 
the sort of rigid barrier between occult sciences, such as astrology, and 
practical sciences, such as mathematics, that modern industrial cultures 
consider self-evident. As Arthur Lovejoy usefully pointed out many years ago 
in The Great Chain of Being, medieval and Renaissance cultures understood 
the cosmos to be a unity, bound together by connections and influences 
>4 
C&e PicatriF-Jliber Hubeufi c£Dttion 
extending from the throne of God above the heavens to the deepest recesses 
of matter. The arts and sciences had their own proper place in that cosmos, 
and each branch of human knowledge, however humble or exalted, cast a 
distinctive light on all the others. Thus the sapiens, the sage or wizard of the 
medieval world, took all human knowledge as his province and applied it to 
the challenging task of providing sound guidance to his clients in a troubled 
and often brutal world. 
The Picatrix and the Necronomicon 
he importance of the wizard as a professional found itself reflected 
early on in literature and folklore, in such figures as Merlin the 
Mage and Nectanebus, who played a Merlinesque role as magical 
instructor to Alexander the Great in the medieval Alexander legends. The 
concept of the magical book containing all the occult secrets of the universe 
similarly found its way into the popular culture of the age. Just as wizards 
passed in turn from medieval legend to modern fantasy fiction, in turn, the 
archetype of the secret book of occult lore found a new home in modern 
literature, and produced a remarkable parallel to Picatrix itself. 
In a 1923 short story, "The Hound," pulp horror writer H. P. Lovecraft 
first mentioned an imaginary tome of darkest magic titled the Necronomicon, 
written by the equally fictional Arab wizard Abdul Alhazred. The 
Necronomicon appeared frequently in Lovecraft's stories from then on, along 
with other equally imaginary tomes such as the Pnakotic Manuscript, and 
evolved into the core text of an imaginary religion of evil: the cult of the 
Great Old Ones, terrifying beings from deep space who had ruled the Earth 
in the prehistoric past and waited until "the stars were right" to resume their 
dominion. 
By 1927 the Necronomicon had become central enough to his "Cthulhu 
Mythos" stories that Lovecraft wrote out a few pages on its supposed history 
to help him keep his facts straight. According to this document,1 the 
original Arabic name of the book was AlAzif, and it was compiled by Abdul 
Alhazred around 730 CE, drawing on forbidden lore from Babylon, Egypt, 
and a lost civilization in the "Empty Quarter" of the Arabian peninsula. 
Alhazred himself was devoured by an invisible monster in the marketplace 
of Damascus in 738, but copies of his book nonetheless got into circulation, 
and it was translated into Greek by Theodorus Philetas in 950, who retitled it 
Necronomicon. (Lovecraft interpreted this as "an image of the laws of death;" 
this is not quite grammatical Greek, and a more accurate translation might be 
1 
Reprinted in Harms and Gome 2003, pp. 303-304. 
3ntrotwctu>n 
'5 
"Concerning the Laws of Death," or possibly "Concerning Dead Laws.") 
In 1228, the Danish scholar Olaus Wormius supposedly translated 
the Necronomicon into Latin, and the famous British occultist John Dee, 
Elizabeth I's court astrologer, made a manuscript English translation some 
centuries later. From that point on, the history discusses how different 
copies got into the places where it turned up in Lovecraft's stories and those 
of other writers who borrowed his eldritch stage props, with his enthusiastic 
permission, for their own horror tales. 
By the last years of his life, Lovecraft was having to fend off requests 
by fans and fellow writers that he find the time to manufacture the 
Necronomicon. His work fell into obscurity for several decades after his death, 
but it found newly appreciative audiences in the 1970s, and an assortment of 
forged Necronomicons duly saw print thereafter. One, written by a group of 
New York occultists under the pen name "Simon," appeared in a mass market 
paperback edition in 1980 and became wildly popular among those members 
of the occult community (unfortunately no small number) who had trouble 
telling the difference between pulp horror fiction and genuine magic. 
Among less credulous occultists, however, rumors began circulating 
sometime in the 1990s that Lovecraft had modeled the Necronomicon on 
Picatrix. This was admittedly only one of several stories that tried to link 
the Necronomicon to some real work of magic, but the rumor gains a certain 
degree of credibility from the remarkable parallels between the two works. 
Like the Necronomicon, Picatrix was first written in Arabic, translated 
into Latin in the thirteenth century, and circulated surreptitiously among 
European occultists for centuries thereafter. Both books contain detailed 
instructions for rituals meant to call down unhuman powers from what we 
would now call outer space, and include malefic magical workings of terrific 
power. 
Lovecraft could easily have learned about Picatrix in time to use it as 
a model for the Necronomicon, as the second volume of Lynn Thorndyke's 
History of Magic and Experimental Science, which devotes an entire chapter to 
Picatrix, was published in 1923. Still, the best study of the Necronomicon so 
far, Daniel Harms and John Wisdom Gonce's The Necronomicon Files (2003), 
points out that Lovecraft's knowledge of the occult was extremely limited, 
and there is no evidence that he drew on anything but a few popular occult 
exposes in constructing the dire rituals of his imaginary cult. Perhaps the 
safest generalization is that if Picatrix did not exist, someone would have had 
to invent it, and this is exactly what Lovecraft seems to have done. 
i* 
ID&e ^atrip-Jltber Hubeus dftrttfon 
Picatrix in Practice 
of the readers of this translation, like the readers of the original 
^ J I r ^ Arabic and Latin editions, will read it in the hope of learning 
^ F j k f how to practice its magic. This can certainly be done, but three 
significant obstacles must be confronted by anyone who hopes to learn the 
magic of Picatrix and put it to work in today's world. 
First, nearly all the magical traditions that fill the pages of Picatrix and 
provided the medieval wizard with his stock in trade are unfamiliar to most of 
today's occultists, and the magical philosophy that underlies them will be even 
more so. Readers steeped in modern occult lore may be startled to find that 
today's popular notion of magical power as a function of the magician's will 
energizing forms in the imagination appears nowhere in Picatrix. This should 
come as no surprise; the concept in question was introduced to the magical 
traditions by Eliphas Levi in 1854 in his Dogme et Ritual de la Haute Magie, 
which took it from the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer, and it existed 
nowhere in magical teachings before that time. 
Picatrix is the product of an older world, and its magic draws on a 
conception of the nature of magic and the universe that differs in almost 
every imaginable way from today's occult traditions. In the magic of 
Picatrix, the sources of magical power are in the macrocosm rather than the 
microcosm; power is native to the universe, not to the mage. Vast currents 
of creative force set in motion by the Godhead itself cascade downward 
through multiple levels of being. They are refracted by the stars and planets 
like rays of light striking moving crystals, and descend to the earth with 
greater or lesser force, depending on the complex geometries of astrological 
relationship. The magician is the one who knows how to catch these currents 
at the moments of their greatest power, store their energies in material objects 
appropriate to them, and direct those energies to carefully chosen ends. 
The differences between modern occultism and the old magic of Picatrix 
are sweeping enough that attempts to practice the workings in the pages 
that follow from within the worldview of contemporary magic are unlikely 
to get far or accomplish much. The student of Picatrix today needs to start 
at the same place as his equivalent ten centuries ago—with a thorough 
study of traditional astrology, as it was practiced in the Middle Ages and 
Renaissance. Modern astrology is emphatically not an adequate preparation, 
and in fact can all too easily be a barrier to understanding; instead, close study 
of a standard text such as William Lilly's Christian Astrology, followed by 
practical experience with the techniques it teaches, will provide the necessary 
background. The distance learning courses offered by Renaissance Astrology 
3 n t r o D u c t t o n 
>7 
(http://www.renaissanceastrology.com) provide another and, for many people, 
a more congenial way to gain the same working knowledge of the ancient 
science of the stars. 
The gap between ancient and modern magic and astrology, then, forms 
the first of the three obstacles that must be overcome by the modern student 
of Picatrix. The second unfolds from the gap between the medieval culture 
that gave the old magic its social context and the modern industrial cultures 
that do the same thing for our very different ways of thought. 
Picatrix, to put matters bluntly, is not politically correct, and itt contains 
plenty of things that will affront the modern reader. Name a hot-button 
issue in contemporary culture—relations between the genders, the legitimacy 
of political power, the ethics of using animals as raw material for human 
activities, and more—and you may be sure that Picatrix offends today's 
sensibilities on that issue, since it approaches that issue from within the 
context of its own culture, rather than ours. Many readers will find this 
intolerable, and even those who learn to tolerate it may find that some things 
in the following pages make for uncomfortable reading. 
In some cases, the gap has practical consequences as well. For example, 
many of the confections described in Picatrix—combinations of magically 
effective substances used to receive and apply the descending influences of 
the heavens—include animal ingredients that are illegal for private citizens to 
possess in the United States, and a great many others contain substances that 
are very hard to obtain. Still others are stunningly expensive—how many 
people can afford, say, to buy several ounces of pure gold for a talisman of 
the Sun? In every case, there are alternatives, but it requires careful study of 
Picatrix and other medieval magical texts to identify them and learn how to 
adapt ancient recipes to modern conditions, in the same way that the author 
of Picatrix and his medieval and Renaissance readers adopted the magic they 
inherited to the needs of their own times. 
The author of Picatrix could easily have explained how to do this; at 
several points in the course of the book, he demonstrates a rare talent for 
distinguishing essential themes from minor details, and offers one option 
after another suited to different sets of changing conditions. In most of the 
book, however, he does nothing of the kind. This points up the third obstacle 
that the modern student of Picatrix must confront: the book before you is 
deliberately designed to hide its innermost secrets from anyone who is not 
willing to put in the work necessary to unravel them. 
This is not a user-
friendly book. When the author wrote that it is meant for sages, or at least 
sages in training, he was not simply expressing a preference; he was offering 
a warning to the innocent and incautious. Given the common modern 
carelessness toward magic, this warning needs to be repeated in strong terms. 
i8 
WatnrlLibet 
H u b e u a C D i t t o n 
The teachings in this book are designed to protect themselves from casual use, 
and there are deliberate traps in certain places that have been set for those 
who are not willing to take the time to think things through, or to learn the 
fundamentals of the magicaLphilosophy that underlies the workings given 
below. 
A further warning deserves special emphasis. Some of the recipes in 
this book produce lethal poisons. Not all of them are listed as such; in 
fact, some of them are described as healthful cures, and some of the things 
that are listed as lethal poisons would be harmless if ingested. The medieval 
student of Picatrix, if he followed the advice concerning preparatory studies, 
would have already had a good working knowledge of the herbs and minerals 
that made up the stock in trade of the medieval physician, and thus would 
know at a glance that a recipe containing large doses of bitter almond oil, 
even though it was labeled as a cure, would quickly kill the person who took 
it. Most modern occultists do not have that background. It is therefore 
urgently necessary, if you choose to put any of the following teachings 
into practice, to do the necessary research yourself and be sure that you 
know the health and safety issues surrounding every ingredient. 
You hold in your hands a book of magical philosophy and practice for 
which mages in the Middle Ages were willing to risk their lives, after all, and 
those who were able to find copies might spend the rest of their lives studying 
its pages. At least a hint of that same intensity of purpose and patience 
toward results would make a good starting point for a modern approach to 
Picatrix and its teachings. An immense amount of magic can be learned from 
this book, and only a certain fraction of that is stated in a way that can be 
grasped in a single quick reading. As the author points out, there are entire 
sciences carefully concealed in this book, which can be unfolded through 
patient study and practice. Glance through it passively, and it will teach you 
little and deceive you whenever it can, possibly with disastrous consequences. 
Engage it patiently and actively, pursuing the additional studies the book 
itself urges on you, and portal after portal will open for you. 
A Note on the Text 
his version of Picatrix is based primarily on David Pingree's critical 
edition of the Latin translation made at the court of Alfonso the 
Wise of Castile in 1256; we have also consulted the manuscript 
copy of the Latin text owned by English astrologers William Lilly and Elias 
Ashmole in the seventeenth century, currently in the British Library as Sloane 
Jnttofttction 
'9 
Ms. 3679. We have chosen to use the Latin rather than the Arabic edition 
because neither of us is sufficiently fluent in classical Arabic to manage an 
accurate translation and the Latin text is the one that became a primary 
source for European occultists during the Middle Ages and Renaissance. 
Students of medieval and Renaissance magic will find our translation from the 
Latin text considerably easier to match up to borrowings in such later authors 
as Marsilio Ficino and Cornelius Agrippa than a direct translation from the 
Arabic might be. 
The Latin text differs in many points from the Arabic original, and is 
written in a murky medieval Latin full of words borrowed from Spanish and 
other languages. It has not been possible to interpret all of these satisfactorily, 
those that resisted understanding have been left untranslated, in the hope that 
readers with a background in medieval magical literature may be able to help 
us identify them in a future edition. 
For the convenience of students of the occult, we have provided all the 
magical names and words of power given in the text in both the Latin and 
Arabic forms, and obscure passages and terms in the Latin text have been 
clarified by consulting the 1962 Ritter-Plesner German translation of the 
Arabic text. 
Adocentyn Press has released its complete Picatrix translation in a variety 
of different editions, including the Liber Atratus and Liber Rubeus editions. 
All editions contain the same basic text, but add additional and variant 
passages, either from the Arabic Picatrix or authors cited in Picatrix, not 
found in the Latin Picatrix. The Liber Rubeus edition adds a passage from the 
Arabic Picatrix on the creation of a divinatory head. 
Warning and Disclaimer 
C
he material in this book includes descriptions of processes and 
activities that may be hazardous, illegal, or both. Readers who 
choose to pursue any of these activities do so entirely at their 
own risk, and are urged to use discretion, to be aware of the potential 
risks involved in these processes and activities, and to consult with 
appropriate licensed professionals before making any attempt to perform 
any such processes or activities. The translators and publisher of this book 
shall have no liability nor responsibility with respect to any loss or damage 
caused or alleged to be caused by reading or following any of the instructions 
'n this book. 
Prologue 
21 
T
o the praise and glory of the highest and omnipotent God, who 
reveals the secrets of sciences to those predestined for them, and 
also for the illumination of those learned in Latin who lack books 
written by the old philosophers, Alfonso, by the grace of God the most 
illustrious king of Spain and all of Andalusia, commanded that this book, the 
name of which is Picatrix, be translated from Arabic into Spanish with all zeal 
and diligence. This labor was brought to completion in the year of Our Lord 
1256, of Alexander 1568, of Caesar 1295, and of the Arabs 655. For the 
wise, noble and honored philosopher Picatrix compiled this book from two 
hundred books and many philosophies, and named it with his own name. 
In the name of the Lord, Amen.2 Here begins the book that the most 
wise philosopher Picatrix composed about the art of magic* out of many 
other books. As the wise have said, the first thing that ought to be done 
in everything in this world is to give thanks to God. I say this because He 
ought to be praised by those to whom, by His light, secret things are revealed 
and hidden things made plain, and by His power all miraculous things are 
accomplished, and by Him all prayers and all sciences are made known, and 
by His precepts days are distinguished from nights, and by His virtue all 
things are created from nothing and proceed to their perfection, and by His 
power every created thing is renewed, and is governed according to the nature 
that pertains to it. 
For He is almighty, and by Him all things are renewed through 
generation, and He is not contained by any other thing, nor is He separated 
from anything, for He has no limit, nor is anything outside Him; for He is 
His own place. All the tongues of this world together cannot relate His works 
nor declare His powers; for His wonders are without end, and nothing is 
strange to Him. Therefore is He to be praised, and we should obey Him and 
His prophets and saints, who by His precepts became illustrious on earth and 
revealed to humanity the way whereby the knowledge and wisdom of God 
might be obtained. Wherefore we ask that we might receive His grace and 
finally be brought to His eternal glory. Amen. 
O you who wish to gain the knowledge of the philosophers and to 
understand and ponder their secrets, know that you must first diligently 
search their books, in which the great wonders of their art can be found, and 
seek to discover the wonderful science of magic. First of all, however, you 
? 
This initial section, the invocation, is traditional in Arabic literature, and 
""eludes a brief summary of the central themes of the book. 
3 
Magic: iiigromancia in the Latin text, literally "black divination." 
22 
C&e l&fcatw-Jtfber Hubeiw GDDition 
must understand that this science has been hidden by the philosophers, and 
they have not wished to disclose it to humanity; nay, they have rather hidden 
it with all their might, and whatever they have said about it was phrased in 
secret words, and indeed in signs and similitudes, as though they spoke of 
other sciences. And they did this on account of their honesty and goodness, 
because if this science were revealed to all humanity, the universe would 
be thrown into confusion. And it was for this reason that they spoke of it 
figuratively, that no one would be able to obtain it unless this science was first 
revealed to them. 
In the midst of all these concealments, therefore, they left ways and 
rules by which sages could attain it, and become proficient in all that they 
discussed secretly. For this reason I have compiled this book, intending in it 
to reveal the highways and byways of this science, and give voice to everything 
the wise have said about this science, and reveal all that they have hidden in 
their books in words by means of winding paths and deceptive words. 
Therefore I pray to the most high Creator that this book of mine might 
come only into the hands of sages, who are able to follow what I am about to 
say herein, and maintain it in goodness, and that whatever will be done by its 
means be performed for good and in the service of God. 
This book, moreover, is divided into four parts, and each of these divided 
further into chapters as needed. The first book treats of the nature of the 
heavens and the effects caused by the images in them. The second book 
speaks in general of the figures of heaven and the motion of the eighth sphere4 
and their effects in this world. The third book teaches the properties of the 
planets and signs, and their figures and forms displayed in their proper colors, 
and how to converse with the spirits of the planets and many other magical 
workings. The fourth book, finally, treats of the properties of spirits, and 
of those observances necessary in this art, and how it may be furthered by 
images and incenses and other things. 
Book One 
24 
^tcatrir-iUber Hubeus d^ttton 
Book One 
ere follow the chapters of the first book: 
Chapter One: H o w you may know your place5 in the 
universe. 
Chapter Two: 
What magic is and what its properties are. 
Chapter Three: What the heavens are and of their substance. 
Chapter Four: The general theory and composition of the 
heavens for making magical images. 
Chapter Five: O f examples of the theory of images, and of 
those things needful for making magical images. 
Chapter Six: In what degree everything exists in the 
universe, and how it is known that man is a lesser world and 
corresponds to the greater world. 
Chapter Seven: In what degree everything in the universe 
exists, and many other profound things, hidden by the wise, 
that we intend to reveal in this book of ours. 
Boob 3 Chapter i 
25 
Chapter One 
How you may know your degree in the universe 
ou should know, my dearest brother, that the best and most noble 
~ M j t ^ gift that God has given to humanity in this world is knowledge. 
By knowledge we become acquainted with ancient things, and the 
causes of everything in the world, and what more immediate causes are the 
causes of other things, and how one thing corresponds to another. By this we 
can know everything that is and why it is, and why one thing is raised above 
another in due order, and in what place exists the root and beginning of all 
the things of this world: that thing by which all things are dissolved, and 
through which everything new and old is made known. 
For this is truly the first, and it lacks nothing, nor does it need anything 
else with it except itself; it is the cause of all other things, and does not receive 
its qualities from another. It is not a material body, nor is it compounded of 
material bodies, nor is it mixed with anything other than itself, but rather is 
all things in itself. Therefore it may not be called anything except the One. 
Properly speaking, it is the sole truth and unique unity, and from it, 
anything united receives its unity. It is also the primal truth, and does not 
receive its truth from another; rather, everything receives truth from it. 
Everything apart from it is imperfect, while it alone is perfect. Nor is there 
perfect truth or unity apart from it, but it alone can be rightly called perfect 
unity and truth. All things are under it, and receive from it truth and unity, 
generation and corruption, as it is the cause of these things. 
Because of this it may be known what part of anything receives its 
properties from it, and how this occurs, and why. For the One alone 
comprehends the order and relation of the generations and corruptions of 
all created things, and which of them are first, which are of a middle station, 
and which are last.6 The last are the cause of their own corruption, and are 
not the cause of generation in any other thing; the middle have the cause of 
corruption in them, and are the cause of corruption in all things that exist 
beneath them; the first is the cause of the generation and corruption of all 
other things that exist beneath them, and nothing is higher or more perfect 
than it, so as to be the cause of its generations and corruptions. 
Nor is anything other than the One capable of perfect knowledge of the 
order of created things, and how and why the last is raised up by similarity, 
step by step, until it corresponds to the first, and descends again from the 
first in due order until it corresponds with the last. For the first alone is 
6 
These are the three worlds of medieval and Renaissance magic, the spiritual, 
celestial, and material worlds respectively. 
C & e ^ i c a t r i j ^ J U b e r U u b e i w L i t t o n 
the perfect philosophy and the knowledge of truth. You should know that 
knowledge is a perfect and noble thing, and you ought every day to study 
God—that is, to study His commandments and His goodness—because from 
him knowledge, perception, and goodness proceed. And His spirit is a noble 
and exalted radiance. Whoever intends to study Him ought to despise the 
things of this world, which have an end, and no stability exists in them. From 
Him, as from a higher world, the human spirit descends, and it ought to 
desire to return to the place whence it came and where its root abides. There, 
indeed, it has the capacity to know what the world is and what its powers are, 
and in what manner it was made by its Creator. The source of this knowledge 
is true wisdom. 
You should likewise know that God is indeed the Shaper and Creator 
of the whole world and everything that exists in it, and that this world and 
everything in it were created from on high. Yet the mind of God is too deep 
and potent to be comprehended, and what little can be comprehended of it 
can be grasped only through study and knowledge. This is the greatest gift 
that God gave to humanity, that they might seek to know and understand. 
To study, therefore, is to serve God. Note also that knowledge has three 
properties, of which the first is that it always gains and never diminishes, the 
second that it fosters virtuous habits, and the third that it does not increase 
unless the knower wills it and delights in it, and seeks after it with the reason 
and will. 
Wherefore you should know that the secrets we intend to reveal in this 
book of ours cannot be won unless you obtain knowledge first. Whoever 
desires to know ought to acquire a passion for the sciences and thoroughly 
scrutinize their rules, for it is ordained that these secrets cannot be won except 
through wisdom and study in the sciences. In these secrets, however, is a 
great purity with which you will be able to help many. 
Chapter Two 
What magic is and what its properties are 
ou should know that this science is named magic. We call magic 
whatever is done by man, by which sense and spirit follow by its 
action in all their parts, or by which marvelous things are done so 
that the senses are led by them, contemplating and marveling." Magic is 
7 
Thar is, magic can either bind the human mind and spirit by its own subtle 
power, or the magician can make the appearance of something wonderful and use 
that appearance to catch and guide the mind. 
B o o b 3 Chapter 2 
27 
difficult to understand because it uses connections hidden from our senses 
and sight. This is because these connections are divine powers placed before 
things to lure them upwards, as said before; and this science is too deep and 
strong for the intellect. 
Part of this science is practical because it operates on spirit by spirit, 
and this is done by making things similar that are not so in essence. 
The composition of images does this with spirits and bodies, while the 
composition of alchemy does this with bodies and bodies. More generally, 
we use the word magic for all things hidden from the senses, and those things 
that most people do not know how to do nor whence their causes arise. 
By sages, magical images are called talismans,8 which may be translated 
"violators," because whoever makes an image does so by violence, and makes 
it by conquering the substance of which it is made. To work victoriously he 
makes it with mathematical proportions and influences, and uses celestial 
writing. These images are made from their proper substances in order 
that they might receive the aforementioned influence, and this is done at 
appropriate times. By suffumigation1' they are strengthened, and spirits are 
drawn into these images. 
Know, then, that this is similar to the elixir1", which conquers bodies 
and by transmutation changes them to other, purer bodies. Magical images 
similarly work in such a way that they accomplish all things through violence. 
Poisons work in a similar way, when they course through a body and change 
it, reducing it to its nature, because one body is changed into another by the 
power of the compositions that exist in it. 
You should know also that the power of purification that is called the 
elixir is made from earth, air, fire and water. These four powers become one 
in it, reduced to a common property and nature, because when it enters and 
penetrates a body it spreads through all its parts so that the body might better 
be altered and more readily obey and be transmuted under the elixir's power. 
Similarly, also, the elixir in alchemy works by quickly converting a body from 
one nature into another, nobler one, first overwhelming its harsh and hissing 
spirit, and removing its qualities and its dregs. This is the secret of the elixir 
according to the sages of old. 
The word elixir may be translated "fortitude," because it shatters other 
fortitudes by conquering them, and transmutes them from one property to 
nother until it reduces them to its own." The elixir cannot be made except 
^ 
The Arabic word tils am, "talisman," appears here as telsam in the Latin text. 
9 
Suffumigation: the act of exposing a talisman to the smoke of incense, so the 
niagical qualities of the incense enter into tne talisman. 
, 1 0 
Elixir: the philosopher's stone, which has the power to change base metals 
'"to silver or gold. 
1 1 
This passage is reminiscent of the Emerald Tablet, a classic alchemical text, 
28 
E&e i^cattfj^JUber liubeua CUition 
by compounding animals, plants, woods, and minerals into one, as they 
imply who say that the elixir is made in the same way as the world, since the 
world is compounded out of all the things we have named. Similarly, the 
elixir ought to be compounded out of similar things, so that every part of it 
is joined together and enters into every other part, so that the woods are not 
able to remain by themselves, nor are other vegetable or animal things able to 
remain separate from vegetables, and similarly minerals desire coction12 and 
the power of fire together with moisture and the power of air, and then are 
satisfied. We have found all this in a book called the Book of Ordinances. For 
now, however, we return to our subject. 
Magic is divided into two parts, that is, theoretical and practical. The 
theoretical part is knowledge of the places of the fixed stars, because from 
these are composed the celestial figures and forms of the heavens, and of 
how their rays project into the planets that move of themselves, and of 
understanding figures of the heavens when they wish to make them. In this 
is included all that the sages of old have said about the elections of hours and 
times to work with images. You should know that those who have equaled 
the ancients in making images know that the virtue of images consists 
wholly in the election of hours and times of the proper constellations, and in 
appropriate substances from which the images are made. Words also form a 
part of magic, because words themselves have magical virtues. Plato says the 
same thing, that just as a friend can become an enemy through wicked and 
insulting words, good and friendly words can turn an enemy into a friend. By 
this it is clear that words have magical power in them. The greatest strength 
is achieved when several strengths are joined together to overcome, and this is 
the perfect virtue in magic. This comprises the theoretical part. 
The practical part, in turn, is the combination of the three natures with 
the virtue infused by the fixed stars. This is what the sages call virtue, but 
they do not know how or in what manner this virtue comes to be imparted. 
When things that have such virtues are brought together at the same time, 
they have need of elemental heat. This is done by suffumigation, which helps 
to complete the incomplete virtue. Similarly, it ought to have natural heat, 
that is, by digestion. These two cannot be complete, nor are they able to 
function, without the presence of human and animal spirit. 
You should know also that magic is gained by actions and works in one 
way, and more subtly in another. That which is gained by actions and works 
is gained from the magistery that is performed by the sage in the world 
which says of the elixir: "This is the strong fortitude of all fortitudes, penetrating 
every solid and overcoming every subtle thing." 
12 
Coction: literally "cooking," the steady application of hear that forms the 
chief working method of the alchemist. 
ilBoob 2 Chapter 5 
45 
of the circle of the Moon and the sage who is mentioned in the Nabatean 
Agriculture,13 as it says in that book, in the place where it says that you ought 
to accept the four birds. And the part that is gained subtly is from works 
performed by that sage who works in the motion of the sphere of Saturn, and 
also the sage who works in the motion of the sphere of Venus. And these two 
sages also are spoken of in the aforesaid book. 
The ancient Greek sages used to work in subtle ways to change 
appearances, and to make those things appear to be so which were not. They 
named the science of images Yetelegehuz,14 which is translated "the attraction 
of celestial spirits," and this name is applied to every part of magic. No one 
is able to attain this science except by astrology, nor are they able to proceed 
beyond the study of astrology unless at least they know the figures that exist 
in the eighth sphere, and their motion, as well as that of the other spheres, 
and the division of the twelve signs of the Zodiac with their degrees and 
their natures, and the qualities of each sign and their correspondences in 
this world, and the divisions of the planets in these twelve signs, and the 
movement of the Zodiac, and when other things are said to be conjunct 
with them, and the nature of the seven planets and the Head and Tail of the 
Dragon15 and their places in the heavens and their correspondences among 
the things of this world, and how to predict their risings and settings, and 
which ones rise and set before others, and their radical significations. These 
are the fundamentals of astrology, and knowing which of the seven planets 
rules a figure and understanding the order in which they rule, and how to 
extract the planetary parts from the Zodiac. 
These are the things without which it is impossible for anyone to achieve 
mastery of this science, and all of it may be found in books of astrology. 
This is what the first sage says who is described in the aforesaid Nabatean 
Agriculture, when he says, "They have raised me above the seven heavens." He 
means by this anyone who knows all the motions of the heavens and their 
qualities by the power of the understanding and the senses. This is likewise 
what God meant when He said, "Let Us exalt him on high." He means by 
this, "Let Us give to him senses and intellect, so that he might be able to 
Penetrate the highest of sciences." 
Wah I • 
w o r k , the Kitab al-filaha al-Nabatiya in Arabic, was compiled by Ibn 
sou 
^ 
' n t' l e ' a t e 
century of the common era, and was one of the primary 
il Py"/ 
? ' c a t r ' x - The Latin text refers to it here as Liber de Aljilaha (from Arabic 
"agriculture"). It is called the Chaldean Agriculture cIsewhere in Picatrix. 
'Manifest 
attempt at the Greek word entelechia, "that which completes or 
'wpectiv f e a c l a " d T a " 
t h e D r aS o n : 
t h e n o r t l 1 a n c l SOUt'1 n 0 f l c S o f t' , C M o o n ' 
?o 
JE&e l%atrij;-iliber iclubeiw GDDitton 
Chapter Three 
What the heavens are and what their substance is 
he shape of heaven is spherical, round and smooth in its surface, 
and all things in it share the same qualities and times. Some have 
thought that at one time the sky did not appear to have the quality 
of roundness. This is false, for the shape of heaven is its proper shape, and it 
cannot be other, for this is the shape of spirit, as though saying that spirit is 
first and nothing in the world is older than it. For it cannot be doubted that 
what is first and oldest in the world ought to have a perfect form; but the 
perfect form and figure is the circle, because it is the first of all figures and is 
made from a single line. 
No generation or corruption of the bodies composing the universe 
can happen in the heavens. Conversely, it is impossible for any part of the 
heavens to undergo generation or corruption anywhere in the universe. This 
can only be because of the superiority and power of the heavens. 
Now heaven, as we have said, is a sphere, round in all its parts and of 
perfectly equal curvature. A circular line surrounds it; in the middle of that 
circle is a point so positioned that all lines drawn from it to the surrounding 
circle are of equal length, and this point is called the center. It is said that 
these lines signify the rays that the stars cast upon the earth, which is at the 
center. From these come the power and virtue of images, and they work in 
this way. Thus we say that heaven is a round sphere and contains the whole 
world within itself, that is to say, within its capacity. Such a sphere has no 
excess or lack, and is a figure permanent in itself; from it all the powers of 
spirits are summoned. 
The heaven of the fixed stars is under it, and the center of this sphere is 
not a part of the sphere itself, for its center is the same as the center of the 
earth. The nature of the heavens is all one nature, and all the movements of 
nature and of material bodies follow the movements of the heavens. All heat 
comes from it, and by this we mean that whatever heat exists in the world 
exists because of the heavens. 
The degrees of heaven are 360 in number, according to the first division, 
and there are exactly as many figures, and by them all judgments in astrology 
are distinguished, since judgments follow the images of heaven, and the 
heavens are the cause of all operations below them. 
N o w the work and potency when the planets are in these figures, either 
by aspect or conjunction, which they have one after another by every kind o f 
conjunction, and the work of the planets that take place in terrestrial things 
ilBoob 4 Chapter 5 45 
in this world are according to this manner. For if it be Saturn, things that 
are cold and dry are affected, but by Jupiter things warm and moist, and by 
Mars, hot and dry. By Venus, things moderately hot but very moist, but by 
Mercury, things weakly hot and very dry, while by Luna things cold and moist 
are moved, and by the powers of the fixed stars the same things are moved as 
by Luna. When any planet is in any degree of heaven where it can be, and 
the planet be manifestly hot but weak in moisture or dryness, and the Sun 
attracts these virtues, we ought to judge that its effect grows and increases. 
Similarly, if we find that a planet acts to increase something by its nature and 
power, that thing will be stronger and more potent in its effect, while if the 
planet works against it, it weakens the effect according to its power in that 
work. Accordingly we may understand the planets' effects without error. You 
ought to study this in books of astrology. 
Chapter Four 
The general theory and arrangement of the heavens for 
making magical images 
'hile the wise of old desired to make images, it was not in their 
power to disclose the constellations which are the foundations 
'of the science of images, and by which the effects of that science 
are made manifest. We, however, intend to speak of the foundations of these 
constellations, with which you may help yourself in every ceremony involving 
magical images; and these foundations are the means by which the heavens 
bring about the effects of the images. Those who seek to make images must 
first master the science of calculating the positions of the planets and the 
constellations, and also the motions of the heavens. 
Furthermore, they ought to believe firmly in the works that they do with 
images, so that what they do will be true and without doubt, nor should 
they harbor doubts concerning its effectiveness, since this work is not done 
in order to test or prove whether it be true or not; rather, they should have 
faith in their mind that it be true. By this the rational spirit is strengthened, 
and joined to that virtue of the upper world from which proceeds the celestial 
spirit that acts in the image; and in this way, what is desired will come to pass. 
Thus it is necessary to believe firmly, because it is by this that the image 
w'll have the power to call upon the cooperation o f the intelligence, and o f all 
(he primary and principal intelligences, and all the intermediate intelligences. 
Among all these intelligences, the human soul or intellect is clearly the lowest 
jGC&e ^icatri^illber Uubeua dDOitton 
that can call upon the cooperation of others, and then only when it operates 
and cooperates with a firm and full intention and diligence and with the 
greatest solicitude. This is called faith in a proposition. In other works of 
craftsmanship, if the craftsman is not diligent, solicitude and full intention 
can accomplish the work, but only rarely in making images will this function 
and complete the work. 
Now, however, I wish to teach you one thing very necessary for this work, 
and that is working when conditions are best around this world.16 I say to 
you that you should not do anything in this work unless the Moon stands in a 
degree convenient and appropriate for the work you intend to do, because the 
Moon has powers and manifest works in all things that are beneath her, and 
none of them are hidden from her. And hereafter I will tell you the highest 
considerations in these processes that will produce much for you in this work, 
but for now I intend to speak of the effects and works of the Moon within 
the boundaries of her mansions, according to the consensus of all the wise of 
India about the 28 Mansions of the Moon. 
The first Mansion of the Moon, then, is called Alnath1". It begins at 
the first minute of Aries,18 and ends at 12 degrees 51 minutes 26 seconds of 
that sign. The wise of India begin journeys and take medicines when the 
Moon is in this Mansion. This Mansion also ought to be used as the root in 
every image that you wish to make in order to go on a journey, so as to travel 
safely and return in good health. It ought also to be used as the root to place 
discord and enmity between husband and wife, and between two friends so 
that they become enemies, and to sow discord between two allies; and you 
should do similarly when you wish to cause servants to flee. I will reveal to 
you also the roots and foundations that ought to be observed in all good acts 
and works, that is, you should see that the Moon is well dignified and that it 
is safe from Saturn and Mars and from the combustion of the Sun. Do the 
contrary in every evil work, that is, see that the Moon is combust or conjunct 
Saturn and Mars, or that she applies to an aspect with one of the latter. 
The second mansion is called Albotain.1'' It begins at 12 degrees of 
Aries 51 minutes and 26 seconds, and ends at 25 degrees 42 minutes and 52 
seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images to dig for streams and 
wells, to find hidden treasures, and for the planting of a great deal of wheat, 
for the destruction of buildings before they can be completed; and similarly 
to make images to enrage one man against another and to make stronger and 
firmer the incarceration of captives. 
16 
That is, when conditions in the heavens that surround the earth are 
favorable. 
17 
In Arabic, Al-Sharatain. 
18 
That is, 0 degrees 0 minutes 0 seconds of Aries. 
19 
In Arabic, Al-Butain. 
ilBoob 4 Chapter 5 
45 
The third mansion is called Azoraya.-" It begins in the aforesaid degree21 
and ends at 8 degrees 34 minutes and 2 seconds ofTaurus. In this Mansion 
make images to sail safely on the sea and to return safely, and to firmly 
incarcerate captives, and to complete the works of alchemy, and all works 
done by fire, and to hunt in the country, and to cause love between man and 
wife. 
The fourth mansion is called Aldebaran." It begins at 8 degrees 34 
minutes and 2 seconds ofTaurus and ends at 21 degrees 25 minutes and 44 
seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images for the destruction of 
cities and villages and for any other building which you wish not to endure, 
so that it proceeds to destruction, and to make a lord despise his servant, and 
to place discord between man and wife, and to destroy fountains, streams, 
and those that seek treasures underground, and to kill and bind all reptiles 
and venomous animals. 
The fifth mansion is called Almices.2' It begins at 21 degrees 25 minutes 
and 44 seconds ofTaurus and ends at 4 degrees 17 minutes and 10 seconds 
of Gemini. In this Mansion make images for youths to learn arts and 
occupations, and for the salvation of travelers, and to quickly return and for 
sailors to travel safely, and to improve buildings and to destroy the friendship 
between two people, and for favor between husband and wife, and do this 
when the Moon is rising in a humane sign, safe from Saturn and Mars and 
the combustion of the Sun, as we have described above in the First Mansion. 
The these are the humane signs: Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius and 
Aquarius. 
The sixth mansion is called Athaya.24 It is from 4 degrees 17 minutes and 
10 seconds of Gemini all the way to 17 degrees 8 minutes and 36 seconds 
of the same sign. In this Mansion make images for the destruction of cities 
and villages, and to besiege them with armies, and for the enemies of kings 
to exact vengeance, and to destroy crops and trees, and to cause friendship 
between two people, to improve hunting in the country, and to destroy 
medicines so that when they are taken they do not work. 
The seventh mansion is called Aldirah.25 It begins at 17 degrees 8 
minutes and 36 seconds of Gemini and its boundary is the end of that sign. 
In this Mansion make images to increase merchandise and profit and to travel 
safely, and to increases crops, and to sail beneficially on the water, and to 
cause friendship between friends and allies, and to expel flies so that they will 
In Arabic, Al-Thuraiya. 
2 1 
That is, 25 degrees 42 minutes and 52 seconds of Aries. 
2 2 
In Arabic, Al-Dabaran. 
In Arabic, Al-Haqa. 
In Arabic, Al-Hana. 
2 5 
In Arabic, Al-Dhira. 
?4 
C&e McatriF-JLxber Uubeius cftrttfon 
not enter where you wish, and to destroy officials, and it is good to go into 
the presence of the king or other high nobles, and to cause the king and other 
lords to be benevolent. 
The eighth mansion is called Annathra.26 It begins in the first degree of 
Cancer' and lasts for the next 12 degrees 51 minutes and 26 seconds. In this 
Mansion it is good to make images for love and friendship, and for the safe 
travel of those who travel in wagons through the countryside, and to cause 
friendship between allies, and to make the incarceration of captives firm, and 
for the destruction and affliction of captives, and to expel mice and bugs from 
whatever place you wish. 
The ninth mansion is called Atarf.2" It begins in at 12 degrees 51 minutes 
and 26 seconds of Cancer and ends at 25 degrees 42 minutes and 51 seconds 
of the same sign. In this Mansion it is good to make to destroy crops, and to 
make unfortunate those who travel on journeys, to do evil to all men, and to 
cause division and hatred between allies, and to help a man defend himself 
from being attacked by another man. 
The tenth mansion is called Algebha.29 It begins at 25 degrees 42 minutes 
and 51 seconds of Cancer and ends at 8 degrees 34 minutes and 18 seconds 
of Leo. In this Mansion make images for love between man and wife, and for 
the destruction of enemies, and to make firm the incarceration of captives, 
and for the strengthening and completion of buildings, and for the love of 
allies and for their mutual help. 
The eleventh mansion is called Azobra.3" It begins at 8 degrees 34 
minutes and 18 seconds of Leo and ends at 21 degrees 25 minutes and 44 
seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images to rescue captives, to 
besiege cities and villages, to organize trade and profit from it, for travelers on 
the roads to journey safe and unharmed, to strengthen buildings so that they 
are stable, and to increase the wealth of allies. 
The twelfth mansion is called Acarfa.31 It begins at 21 degrees 25 minutes 
and 44 seconds of Leo and ends at 4 degrees 17 minutes and 6 seconds of 
Virgo. In this Mansion make images to increase harvests and plants, for the 
destruction of riches and of ships, and for the improvement of allies, officials, 
captives and servants that they will be steadfast and honest. 
The thirteenth mansion is called Alahue.'2 It begins at 4 degrees 17 
minutes and 6 seconds of Virgo and last all the way until 17 degrees 8 
26 
In Arabic, Al-Nathrah. 
27 
That is, 0 degrees Cancer 0 minutes 0 seconds. 
28 
In Arabic, Al-Tarf. 
29 
In Arabic, Al-Jabhah. 
30 
In Arabic, Al-Zubrah. 
31 
In Arabic, Al-Sarfah. 
32 
In Arabic, AI-Awwa. 
ilBoob 4 Chapter 5 45 
minutes and 36 seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images for 
the increase of trade and profit, the increase of harvests, for travelers to have 
good journeys on the roads, for the completion of buildings, for the freedom 
of captives, and the binding of nobles to have good from them. 
The fourteenth mansion is called Azimech.33 It begins at 17 degrees 8 
minutes and 36 seconds of Virgo and it terminates at the end of the sign. In 
this Mansion make images for the love of man and wife, to heal the sick with 
physic and medicine, to destroy harvests and plants, to destroy lust, for the 
destruction of those who go by roads, for the benefit of kings that they have 
good and ascend to their reign, for sailors to sail well and safely, and for the 
friendship of allies. 
The fifteenth mansion is called Algarfa.34 It begins in the first degree of 
Libra35 and ends at 12 degrees 51 minutes and 26 seconds of the same sign. 
In this Mansion make images for the digging of wells, to seek underground 
treasure, to impede travelers to that they are unable to go on their journeys, 
and to separate husband and wife so that they never join with each other, to 
place discord between friends and allies, to scatter enemies from your area, 
and for the destruction of the house36 of your enemies. 
The sixteenth mansion is called Azubene.r It begins at 12 degrees 51 
minutes and 26 seconds of Libra and ends at 25 degrees 42 miutes and 52 
seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images for the destruction 
of merchandise, harvests and plants, and to put discord between friends, 
and between man and wife, and the debauching of a woman you desire, for 
impeding those who journey that the end of their road is never reached, and 
to cause hatred between friends and liberate captives from incarceration. 
The seventeenth mansion is called Alichil.38 It begins at 25 degrees 42 
minutes and 52 seconds of Libra and ends at 8 degrees 36 minutes and 2 
seconds of Scorpio. In this Mansion make images to improve deception that 
it is accomplished well, to beseige cities and villages, to make buildings more 
firm and stable, and to save sailors upon the sea. And everyone agrees that you 
should create friendship with a friend when the Moon is in this Mansion so 
that the friendship will be durable and never destroyed, and likewise in this 
Mansion all images for lasting love ought to be made. 
The eighteenth mansion is called Alcalb.3'' It begins at 8 degrees 36 
33 
In Arabic, Al-Simak. 
3 4 
In Arabic, A1 Ghafr. 
35 
That is, 0 degrees 0 minutes 0 seconds of Libra. 
In medieval Arabic parlance the term "house" means also reputation and 
social standing, and this may De intended here. 
37 
In Arabic, Al-Zubana. 
3 8 
In Arabic, Al-Iklil. 
3 9 
In Arabic, Al-Qalb. 
ID&e WattivMbet Kubeus COition 
minutes and 2 seconds of Scorpio and lasts until 21 degrees 25 minutes 
and 44 seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images for men to 
conspire against kings and vengeance against enemies and whatever else of 
this nature you wish, to build buildings that will be strong, to free captives 
from incarceration, and to separate friends. 
The nineteenth mansion is called Exaula.4" It begins at 21 degrees 25 
minutes and 44 seconds of Scorpio and ends at 4 degrees 17 minutes and 
10 seconds of Sagittarius. In this Mansion make images to beseige cities and 
villages, and to enter and take them, and to do whatever else of this kind 
you wish, to destroy the wealth of whomever you please, to expel men from 
a particular place, to improve the lot of men traveling by wagons through 
the countryside, to increase harvests, cause captives to escape, to break and 
destroy ships, to separate and destroy the riches of allies, and to kill captives. 
The twentieth mansion is called Nahaym.41 It begins at 4 degrees 17 
minutes and 10 seconds of Sagittarius and ends at 17 degrees 8 minutes and 
46 seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images to tame wild and 
disobedient beasts, to bring those traveling in wagons swiftly back again, and 
for men to come wherever you wish, for good people to be joined together, to 
firmly incarcerate captives, and to bring evil and destruction to the riches of 
allies. 
The twenty first mansion is called Elbelda.42 It begins at 17 degrees 8 
minutes and 46 seconds of Sagittarius and it lasts until the end of the same 
sign. In this Mansion make images to strengthen buildings, to increase 
harvests, to make a profit and firmly keep money, to go safely through the 
countryside and to separate wives from their proper husbands. 
The twenty second mansion is called Caadaldeba.4' It begins at the first 
degree of Capricorn44 and lasts until 12 degrees 51 minutes and 26 seconds of 
the same sign. In this Mansion make images to cure illnesses, to put discord 
between two people, to make servants and captives flee, to cause goodwill 
between allies, and to make captives escape. 
The twenty third mansion is called Caaddebolach.45 It begins at 12 
degrees 51 minutes and 26 seconds of Capricorn and lasts until 25 degrees 
42 minutes and 52 seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images to 
heal illness, to join friends together, to divide husbands from their wives, for 
captives to escape and flee from their prisons. 
40 
In Arabic, Al-Shaulah. 
41 
In Arabic, Al-Naaim. 
42 
In Arabic, Al-Baldah. 
43 
In Arabic, Sa'd al-Dhabi. 
44 
That is, 0 degrees 0 minutes 0 seconds of Capricorn. 
45 
In Arabic, Sa'd Bula. 
Boob 3 Chapter 4 
? 7 
The twenty fourth mansion is called Caadacohot.4'' It begins at 25 
degrees 42 minutes and 52 seconds of Capricorn and lasts until 8 degrees 
24 minutes and 28 seconds of Aquarius. In this Mansion make images to 
increase merchandise and make a profit out of it, to have goodwill between 
husband and wife, for soldiers to report victory over enemies, to destroy the 
money of allies, and to prevent an official from fulfilling his duties. 
The twenty fifth mansion is called Caaddalhacbia.4' It begins at 8 degrees 
24 minutes and 28 seconds of Aquarius and ends at 21 degrees 25 minutes 
and 44 seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images to besiege 
cities and villages, to take enemies captive and do as much evil to them as 
you please, to make messengers convey their messages and quickly return, 
to separate wives from their husbands, to destroy harvests, to bind a man 
and wife or a woman and her husband so that they cannot copulate, to bind 
whichever part of the human body you wish so that it is not able to function, 
to strengthen the prison of captives; and it is good to secure buildings. 
The twenty sixth mansion is called Almiquedam.4S It begins at 21 degrees 
25 minutes and 44 seconds of Aquarius and ends at 4 degrees 17 minutes and 
10 seconds of Pisces. In this Mansion make images to bind people in mutual 
love, to protect those who travel in wagons, to strengthen buildings and 
make the incarceration of captives firm and to cause evil to them. 
The twenty seventh mansion is called Algarf almuehar.4'' It begins at 4 
degrees 17 minutes and 10 seconds of Pisces and ends at 17 degrees 8 minutes 
and 36 seconds of the same sign. In this Mansion make images to increase 
merchandise and to acquire profit, to unite allies, increase harvests, heal 
illness, to destroy the riches of whomever you wish, to impede the building of 
buildings, to put travelers on the sea in peril, to prolong the incarceration of 
captives and to do evil to whomever you wish. 
The twenty eighth mansion is called Arrexhe.5" It begins at 17 degrees 
8 minutes and 36 seconds of Pisces and lasts until the end of that sign. In 
this Mansion make images to increase merchandise, besiege cities, increase 
harvests, to get rid of things and to destroy an area, to make treasures be 
lost, to travel safely by wagon and safely return, to cause peace and concord 
between man and wife, to make the incarceration of captives firm and to 
inflict evil on sailors on the sea. 
The foundation of all this is that you should see to it that in all good 
works, the Moon is safe from Saturn and Mars and their aspects, and from 
C&e PicatriF-Jliber ttubetw (EDttion 
the combustion of the Sun, and is joined to the fortunes'1 by good aspects— 
that is, the trine and sextile aspects. In all these see to it that the Moon 
separates from one fortune and applies to the other. Do the opposite in 
works of evil. 
One who practices magical arts ought to believe in his workings without 
any doubt regarding the work, because this is how the practitioner is well 
disposed to receive the aforesaid effects and the virtues from that which he 
intends to make. This disposition, achieved in this manner, cannot exist 
outside of man alone; but the disposition that is in other conscious beings 
is the way that they receive sensations according to their own proper nature, 
as wax easily receives forms impressed into it, just as daimons receive their 
daimonic powers, because their bodies are disposed to receive what is suitable 
for daimons; and this is because their feeble bodies are made impotent to 
resist this. 
Similarly, a feeble disposition revealing itself in an otherwise strong 
place is the proper disposition for things out of which images are made; for 
everything is disposed to receive whatever work corresponds to it. This is a 
foundation of this work, and all accords with it. When something is disposed 
to receive an influence, the reception will take place; and when the reception 
has taken place, the effect will be open and manifest, and the figure receives 
strength. The effect will be as you desire insofar as the matter and the form are 
conjoined into unity, the way the figure of a man is united with a mirror or 
water, or as the unity of spirit and body. 
When you wish to cause your effect in the daytime, dispose matters so 
that the Moon is ascending in one of the diurnal signs; and if you wish to do 
it in the night, she should ascend in a nocturnal sign. If she rises in a sign of 
short ascension'2, the effect will be more swift and certain; and if she rises in a 
sign of long ascension, the effect will be slower. This can be strengthened or 
weakened by aspects to the fortunes; for if the Moon ascends in signs of short 
ascension and an infortune1* is there, it will overturn and destroy the effect 
and oppress it, while if she ascends in signs of long ascension and a fortune 
is there, or aspects her closely with a favorable aspect, the effect will be 
accomplished quickly; and similarly when a diurnal sign ascends at night or a 
nocturnal sign in the day, and a fortune is in aspect with it, the fortune guides 
and strengthens it, while if it is in aspect with an infortune, that destroys it. 
Those who intend to make images ought to make sure that they know the 
signs of long and short ascension; the fixed, moveable, and common signs; 
51 
Fortunes: in astrology, the planets Jupiter and Venus. 
52 
Short ascension: the signs Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus and 
Gemini, also known as the signs of direct ascension. The remaining signs are of long 
or oblique ascension. 
53 
Infortunes: in astrology, Saturn and Mars. 
ilBoob 5 Chapter 5 
45 
the diurnal and nocturnal signs; the fortunate and unfortunate planets; and 
when the Moon is safe from influences that interfere with her; and also which 
images are appropriate to the planets and to every sign. You should beware of 
trying to work magic to a good end when the Moon is applying to an eclipse, 
or under the rays of the Sun, that is, twelve degrees before or after. 
In the same way you should preserve her from Saturn and Mars, and be 
careful that she not descend in southern latitudes beyond the twelve degrees 
mentioned above, or the same in northern latitudes. Similarly, you should 
take care that she not be of lessened course and slow, that is, when she moves 
less than 12 degrees in a day, because then she is assimilated to the motion 
of Saturn, and that she not be in the Via Combusta, which is most to be 
guarded against—that is, between the eighth degree of Libra and the third 
degree of Scorpio54—nor at the end of a sign, which are the terms of the 
infortunes, nor cadent from the midheaven—that is, in the ninth house. 
If there should be some very necessary working that cannot possibly wait 
until the moon is free from all of the aforesaid debilities, place Jupiter and 
Venus on the ascendant or midheaven because they will rectify an unfortunate 
Moon. 
You should know that all that we have said, we have said only to reveal 
the secrets that have been written in the books of the wise. We pray God 
Almighty that by his grace and mercy this book of ours may only come into 
the hands of wise and good men. You, then, ought to be the guardian of the 
aforesaid workings, and never reveal them to the unworthy. 
Chapter Five 
Examples of the theory of images, and of those things needful 
for making magical images 
V8E 
'hen you wish to make images to cause love between two people, 
and make love and delight strong and firm between them, make 
'images of the two in their likenesses. Let this be done in the 
hour of Jupiter or Venus, with Caput Draconis rising, and with the Moon 
making a good aspect to Venus, and let the lord of the seventh house apply 
t 0 the lord of the ascendant by a trine or sextile aspect. Afterwards, join the 
'mages as if they were embracing, and bury them in the place of one of the 
two people, namely the person you wish to love the other more. And it shall 
The Via Combusta, according to other sources, extends from 15° Libra to 
'5° Scorpio. 
4° 
E&e Picatrip-Elfljer Kubeti* dEDition 
be as you wish. 
An image to generate peace and love between two people. Make 
two images under the ascendant of the question,55 and make fortunate the 
ascendant and tenth house, and remove malefics from the ascendant, and 
make the lord of the tenth house fortunate and applying to the lord of the 
ascendant by a trine or sextile aspect. 
Here, however, I wish to make clear what is necessary concerning aspects. 
I say that the trine is an aspect of perfect love, and the reason for this is that 
each sign of a fiery nature aspects one another with a trine aspect and signs of 
earthy nature aspect one another with a trine aspect, and you may understand 
similarly the aerial and aquatic signs; and this aspect causes perfect friendship. 
The sextile is an aspect of moderate friendship, because the signs that aspect 
each other by this aspect agree in their active but not passive nature,56 and 
this is why this aspect is said to be of moderate amity. The square aspect is of 
moderate hatred, because they aspect each other from contrary natures. The 
opposition is an aspect of perfect hatred, because the signs that so aspect each 
other are contrary in all four natural qualities. But now let us return to our 
topic. 
Now I will explain how you should make a twofold image. If you do this 
for two friends, make the eleventh house of the first image the ascendant of 
the second image; and if you wish to generate friendship between man and 
wife, make the ascendant of the second image the seventh house of the first 
image. And make it so the lord of the ascendant of the one who will return 
the friendship makes a good aspect with reception to the lord of the ascendant 
of the other image. Then join the images and bury them in the place of the 
one who is to have friendship and they will be friends as before. 
An image to place love between two people. Make two images with 
Venus rising in the first face of Cancer and the Moon in the first face of 
Taurus in the eleventh house. When the images are made attach them so 
they are embracing each other and bury them in the place of one or the other. 
There will be affection and durable love between the two of them. These are 
called figures of alteration, and Ptolemy speaks of them in aphorism 33 of his 
Centiloquium.^ We will speak of this in the fourth book of our work; there 
we will explain more about this, if God wills. 
55 
This implies that the magician first casts a horary chart for the working, and 
uses that chart as the basis for the magical image. 
56 
The elements share one of their two qualities but not both—for example, 
Aries (fire) and Gemini (air) share the quality of warmth, but one is dry while the 
other is moist. 
57 
One of the classic handbooks of astrology used in the Middle Ages, the 
Centiloquium of Claudius Ptolemy consists of one hundred astrological apliorisms. 
ilBoob 3 Chapter 5 
45 
An image for enduring love. Make two images, and put one of the 
Fortunes at the ascendant and the Moon in Taurus conjunct Venus. Write on 
one image a number - that is, a figure of al-Khwarismi, the sort that begin 
with 0™ ~ for 220 in the proper place, and on the other image write the same 
kind of figure for 284 in the proper place. Join the two figures together in an 
embrace, and then there will be perfect and lasting love between the two.™ 
An image for kings and nobles to like whomever you wish. Make an 
image in the form and in the name of the person in this way. Make fortunate 
the ascendant with a fortune that is strong and not cadent, retrograde or 
combust, and make the lord of the ascendant strong and in good condition, 
and direct, and in his exaltation, and make the lord of the tenth house aspect 
the lord of the ascendant with a trine or sextile aspect with strong reception; 
and place the lord of the ascendant in a commanding sign and the lord of the 
tenth in an obeying sign/1" As long as the one for whom you make the image 
shall bear with him, he shall be loved and honored and whatever he requests 
of the king shall be given to him. 
An image for a lord to be loved and for his men to always be obedient 
to him. Make two images, the first of them in the hour of Jupiter, and 
the Moon aspecting the Sun with a good aspect and separating from the 
infortunes, and place the Head of the Dragon in the ascendant. Then make 
the other image when its ascendant is the fifth house from the ascendant 
of the first image, and in the hour of Venus and the Head of the Dragon is 
in the ascendant or aspecting the ascendant with a favorable aspect, and do 
this in the hour of the Moon, when the Moon is free from the infortunes. 
Bury the images under the ascendant of one of the fixed signs in the hour of 
Saturn. As soon as this is done all of your subordinates will be obedient to 
you. 
An image to cause a servant to love his master. Let there be two 
images, of which one should be made in the hour of any of the superior 
planets and with the Moon waxing, with the North Node in the first, fourth, 
seventh or tenth house. Fashion the second image in the hour of any of 
the inferior planets, and the second image make in the hour of an inferior 
planet and make the tenth house of the first image the ascendant of the 
second image, and place the Tail of the Dragon in the first, fourth, seventh or 
tenth house. And when the images are made in this way, join them together 
5® 
The figures of Al-Khwarismi are the numerals we use today, as distinct from 
™e Roman numerals still used in medieval Europe when this translation was made, 
fne author means simply that you should write 220" on the figure rather than 
v .XX. 
59 
220 and 284 are termed "amicable numbers" in Pythagorean numerology, 
because the factors of each one add up to the other. 
60 
The commanding signs are the signs of the Zodiac from Aries through 
V'rgo; the obeying signs are the signs from Libra through Pisces. 
42 
C&e Picatrtr-llibcr Kubeit* GftJition 
embracing and bury them in the place of the person whose love the other 
desires. 
An image to receive honor from a lord. Make an image and make 
fortunate the ascendant and tenth house and likewise the lord of the 
ascendant, and remove malefics from the ascendant and its lord, and place 
benefics in the eleventh house aspecting the ascendant and its lord with good 
and laudable aspects, and make the lord of the tenth house and the lord of 
the ascendant aspecting each other with a good aspect and mutual reception. 
When the image is complete keep it secret and don't let anyone see it and 
when you go into the presence of the lord, the office or honor you seek, you 
will have. 
An image to increase business and trade. Make an image with the 
ascendant and the tenth and their lords fortunate, as well as the lord of the 
house of the lord of the ascendant and the lord of the house of the lord of 
the tenth; make fortunate the Moon and the lord of the house of the Moon, 
and the second house and its lord; and place the lord of the second house in 
reception with the lord of the ascendant by trine or sextile aspect, and place a 
fortune in the second house, and place the Part of Fortune''1 in the ascendant 
or tenth, with the lord of the Part of Fortune making a good aspect to it. 
Make fortunate the eleventh house and its lord. And when this image is 
made, guard it and keep it secret so that no one sees it, and you will make a 
great profit and succeed in all your undertakings. 
An image to cause cities to grow and make them prosper. Make an 
image with the ascendant and the tenth house and their lords fortunate, 
with the fortunes aspecting them, and make fortunate the lord of the second 
house and the lord of the eighth house, and make fortunate the lord of the 
ascendant and have him aspecting a fortune, and make fortunate the lord 
of the house of the lord of the ascendant, and the Moon and the lord of the 
house of the Moon. And when the image is made as described, bury it in the 
middle of the city and it shall be as you wish. 
An image to gain the love of another. Make two images; make the first 
in the hour of Jupiter with Virgo rising, and with the waxing Moon in the 
ascendant, fourth, seventh or tenth houses. Make the second image in the 
hour of Venus when Venus is aspecting Jupiter and the malefics are cadent 
from the ascendant, and make the ascendant of the second image the seventh 
house cusp of the first image, and make the lord of the ascendant of the first 
image apply to the lord of the ascendant of the second image with a trine or 
sextile aspect. When these images have been made in this manner, bind them 
61 
The most famous of the Arabic parts, the part of fortune is calculated from 
the positions of the ascendant, sun and moon, and is used, among other things, as 
part of the delineation of wealth. 
ilBoob 5 Chapter 5 
45 
together embracing each other, and bury them in the place where you wish to 
gain love and delight. 
An image for the destruction of an enemy. Make an image in the form 
and likeness of the one to whom you wish evil, in the hour of Mars, with 
the Moon in Scorpio; and if you are able, make the ascendant unfortunate, 
putting an infortune in the ascendant or forming a bad aspect to the 
ascendant, and put the infortune in aspect with the lord of the ascendant; 
and make unfortunate the lord of the ascendant and the lord of the fourth 
house, and make them aspect each other, or make unfortunate the lord of 
the ascendant in the fourth house, or have it received by a malefic in the 
fourth house or the ascendant. And when the image is made, bury it head 
downwards outside the city in which your enemy lives, and it shall be as you 
wish. 
An image for the destruction of a city. Make an image in the hour of 
Saturn, which is an infortune, when the ascendant of the city is rising, with 
an infortune in the ascendant and as the lord of the ascendant62 and the lord 
of the house63 of the lord of the ascendant as well, and keep the fortunes from 
the ascendant and from the lord of the ascendant and the lord of the triplicity 
of the ascendant, as well as the lords of the fourth, seventh and tenth houses. 
And when the image is made, bury it in the middle of the city and you will 
see miracles. 
An image to hinder buildings so that they are not built. Make two 
images, one in the hour of the Sun, with Leo rising and the other in the hour 
of the Moon with Cancer rising; when the Moon is waxing and safe from the 
malefics and swift: in course. And when they are made, bury them in the hour 
of Venus, and they will hinder buildings. 
An image for the escape of those held in prison. Make an image in the 
likeness of the one whom you wish to be released in the hour of the Moon, 
when she is waning, swift in motion and separated from the malefics. Bury 
the image near the prison when the ascendant is placed as the Tenth house of 
the city where the prisoner is held. 
An image for the destruction of an enemy. Make two images, the 
first in the hour of the Sun, with Leo rising and the Moon cadent from the 
ascendant, and the other make in the hour of the Mars with Cancer rising 
and Mars cadent from the Moon, and make them in the form of one striking 
another. Bury them in the hour of Mars with the first face of Aries rising. 
When you have done this, you will be able to act against your enemy as you 
62 
The lord of the ascendant is the planet ruling the rising sign in an 
astrological chart. 
6 3 
The lord of the house of the lord of the ascendant is the planet ruling the 
sign in which the lord of the ascendant is placed in an astrological chart. 
44 
Kty PicatrtF-Jlfljcr Kiibeiw (BtJition 
wish. 
An image to chase any man from his place. Make an image with a 
tortuous sign ascending, and with the lord of the ascendant cadent from the 
ascendant, fourth, seventh or tenth house, and the Moon similarly cadent. 
Bury the image at a crossroad under the Via Combusta, and make the face of 
the image look away from his place, and you will see miracles. 
An image to separate two friends from each other. Make an image 
under the ascendant of whichever friend you wish, putting a strong malefic in 
the ascendant and tenth house; make unfortunate the lords of the ascendant 
and tenth house, make a malefic aspect them with a square or opposition, and 
make the benefics cadent from the ascendant and the tenth house and their 
lords. Make the other image the same in all respects as we have said above. 
And bury it in the place of the other image when a fixed and malefic sign and 
the Cauda Draconis or other malefic rises. When this is done, they will hate 
each other and never love each other. 
An image for the anger of the king to fall on whomever you wish. 
Make two images according to the principles of talismans that we have 
already set forth; and make the lord of the ascendant cadent from the lord 
of the tenth house or afflicted by him, and aspecting the lord of the fourth 
house by a square or opposition. Bury the image with a fixed and malefic sign 
rising. When this is done, the king will hate the person. 
An image to catch many fish. Make an image in the form of the fish 
that are in that particular river, and make the image with Jupiter rising in 
Pisces, in the hour of Venus. Make it in this way; first make the head and the 
body and then the tail, and join them together at the aforesaid hour. Next 
make a spike of pure silver and place the image on the head of the spike, and 
make a jug or vase of lead with a narrow mouth, and in the middle of the jug 
place the spike standing straight up with the image of the fish at the top of 
the spike. Then take the aforementioned vase and fill it with water and seal 
the mouth with wax so that no water leaks out. All the fish will congregate 
there. 
An image to catch fish. Alhanemi says in his book that he tried this and 
found it to be true. He says to make an image in the form of a fish, and cast 
it with the second face of Pisces rising, and the Moon and Mercury rising, 
and make it in the hour of the Moon. When this image is made, throw it in 
the river where you wish to have fish, and you will see miracles because many 
fish will come to this place. 
An image to chase away scorpions. Make an image of a scorpion in 
very pure gold in the hour of the Sun, with the Moon in the ascendant, 
fourth, seventh or tenth, in Taurus, Aquarius or Leo, but the best is Leo, 
because Leo is by nature more contrary to a scorpion; and let the Sun be 
ilBoob 3 Chapter 5 
45 
in Leo, and Saturn retrograde. First make the tail, then the feet, then the 
claws, and last the head. There are many things to consider and you should 
understand them well because they will assist you in all of your works. When 
the parts are made, place the left claw in the place of the right claw and the 
right foot in the place of the left foot, place the head in its proper position 
and the tail similarly. After this make a stinger and put it upside down on the 
tail with the base of the stinger in its proper place, so the scorpion is stinging 
himself with his own tail. When the image is made in this way, bury it in a 
stone with a hole in it, and let this stone be a metallic ore. Then bury it in 
an important part of the city; and scorpions will flee from this place and they 
will not approach the place of the image or within 45 miles of the place. 
Image to heal the sting of a scorpion. Make the image of a scorpion in 
a bezoar, and do this in the hour of the Moon, with the Moon in the second 
face of Scorpio, and Leo, Taurus or Aquarius rising. Fasten the stone in a 
gold ring and stamp the image in soft incense under the constellation64 we 
have previously described. Give the person who was stung a drink made from 
the incense stamped with the seal, and they will be cured at once and their 
pain relieved. 
One who always used the aforesaid method and all these sciences, who 
came from the land of the black people,65 found that he could write a single 
name on a brass tablet and always carry it with him. Whenever anybody was 
stung by a scorpion, he bathed the tablet in water and had the water drunk by 
the person who was stung, who at once was healed and relieved of pain. He 
also said that when he did not have the brass tablet with him, he would write 
the name on a glass saucer with the kind of chalk that can be written with, or 
with saffron, or anything similar that can be drunk. He would bathe that in 
water and give it to the sick person, and at once the pain would depart. 
If it were not for fear of going on at too much length, I could relate other 
marvels that he did with this name, because the people to whom he gave it 
to drink were a very great number, such that I cannot tell of them all briefly. 
Since I myself saw experiments66 done with this name, however, I will forbear 
to relate more about this name in this book and the present chapter. This is 
the name: 
The word "constellation" literally means "combination of stars," and was 
used in medieval astrology as a term for a particular set of astrological conditions. 
65 
The method of bathing an object covered with writing in water, and 
drinking the water as a medicine, was much used in ancient Egypt, and may indeed 
have been transmitted to sub-Saharan Africa. 
66 
The word "experiment" (in Latin, experimentum) did not have quite the 
same meaning in the Middle Ages that it does today—it meant, broadly speaking, 
the proof of a teaching by practical experience—but no other modern English word 
comes closer. 
C&e i?lcatriF-Jliber Hubeiw (^Dttton 
zaare zaare raam zaare zaare6" 
fegem bohorim borayn nesfis albune 
fedraza affetihe taututa tanyn zabahat 
aylatricyn haurane rahannie ayn latumine 
queue acatyery nimiere quibari yehuyha 
nuyym latrityn hamtauery vueryn 
catuhe cahuene cenhe beyne 4 s. 
The aforesaid name must be written in seven lines precisely, neither 
more nor less, with the Seal of Solomon at the end of the seventh line. It is 
said also that this should be written on the first Thursday in May, or that it 
should be written on the first Thursday of any month you wish; and I have 
seen it written in whatever day was convenient. Beware that you do not make 
a mistake in these names, neither in their form nor in their figure, that you 
not fall into error. The name that is written here bohorim I have seen the wise 
write nohorim, that is, with an initial «, but I myself recollect it beginning 
with b as I have said above. I say this to you so that the secret of this science 
may be revealed to you. 
This name may also be written another way, that is: 
caare zaare raam zaare 
fegem bohorim vabarayn nense albime 
fedrata offetihe traveuta tanin tribabat 
aylatricyn haurauc rahaune ayn latumine 
quene atatyery miniere quibarii yehaybari 
ymlateyoyn hanitanery veveryn 
cahuene theonhe beyne t t $ . 
The foregoing name is written in another book as follows: 
caare zaare regem boorum 
vabara yn nefx albune 
federata effocye tantuca canyn cahabat 
ay latricyn haurauc rahannye ayn lataminie 
quene acatyery mynere quibari ye hay kanny 
ym latricyn hamtavery verieryn 
canene tenothe beyne. 
An image for men to be loved by their wives. Make the image of a girl 
in a cold and dry metal, and make it when Mercury is rising in Virgo and 
increasing in the circle, or when it is the almuten figuris, and do this work in 
the hour of Mercury. Set it aside until the time when the image is completed. 
67 
The similarity of this first line to the Sanskrit mantra Hare hare Rama hare 
hare is unlikely to be accidental. 
ilBoob 5 Chapter 5 
45 
Make another image in the form of a youth and make it when Mercury is 
in Virgo, having returned to the place where you made the first image, or 
in Gemini, and beware of a diversity of ascendants; that is, when Mercury 
is in Virgo do not have Gemini rising, and when Mercury is in Gemini do 
not have Virgo rising, and whichever you have rising, place Mercury there. 
When the two images have been made in this way, attach them to each other 
as though embracing, and place the hands of each one around the sides of 
the other, and do all this work in the hour of Mercury with Virgo or Gemini 
rising. Make a band around the images using the same metal from which you 
made them, and bury them someplace in a city with many people. When you 
have done this men will embrace their wives and each hold the other dear. 
Similarly when someone seeks love from another, bury the images in the place 
where you wish them to be united. 
An image for the destruction of cities, house and the like. Make an 
image under the ascendant of the city, if it is known, or under the ascendant 
of a horary question. Make unfortunate the ascendant and fourth house, and 
the lord of the ascendant, and the Moon, and the lord of the house of the lord 
of the Moon, and the lord of the house of the lord of the ascendant, and the 
tenth and its lord. When the image is made as has been said above bury it in 
the middle of the city and it will be as you wish. 
An image to make a physician successful. Make on a sheet of tin the 
image of a man seated on a throne, doing the work of a physician. Make 
another image of a man standing on his feet holding a urine flask before him, 
and making a judgment on it.68 Make both of these images with Taurus or 
Libra rising, Mars rising, and the Dragon's Head at the midheaven. When 
you have made them, put the tin plate with the image in the place where 
you wish people to come, and you will see people drawn miraculously to this 
place. 
An image for the growth of harvests and crops. Make the image of a 
seated man surrounded by harvests, trees and crops, on a silver plate; and 
make it when Taurus rises, when the Moon is in Taurus and the Sun is going 
towards Saturn. And bury it in the place you wish, and all seeds and crops 
will grow well and quickly without damage from beasts or birds or storms or 
anything else that is a nuisance at harvest time. 
An image to heal illnesses involving stones/'9 Make the image of a 
lion on a sheet of the purest gold, holding a stone in its paw as if dancing 
with it, and make it in the hour of the Sun with the first degree of the second 
face of Leo rising. Whoever carries this image will be free from their illness 
Diagnosis by the color, clarity, and odor of urine was important in both 
Arabic and European medicine in the Middle Ages. 
Kidney or bladder stones. 
48 
jOje PtcatrtF-Hltber llubeua GftJttion 
immediately. This has been proven many times. Hermes adds that in making 
this image, the Moon should not be applying to Saturn by sextile, and the 
Sun should not be in aspect to Saturn, or should be receding from such an 
aspect. 
An image for removing illness, melancholy and spells. If you wish to 
remove mechanical"" infirmities, to strengthen health and to return evil spells 
to their makers, make an image in the purest silver in the hour of Venus, 
when the Moon is in the ascendant, fourth, seventh or tenth houses and 
aspecting Venus with a good aspect, and the lord of the 6,h house aspecting a 
benefic by trine or opposition, and the lord of the eighth squaring Mercury. 
Be sure that Mercury is not retrograde, combust or aspecting the malefics. 
Make this image in the final hour of Sunday, with the lord of the hour in the 
tenth or the ascendant. When it is made in this way the aforesaid infirmities 
will be removed. 
You should know that the virtues of images and their power and the 
effect that they have only exist because of the heavenly bodies, and when 
these images are made according to the motions of heaven you will not find 
anything to impede or destroy them. It is necessary to observe, when casting 
images for love and friendship, that the Moon is fortunate and waxing and 
not when the Moon is afflicted and waning. Here is an example of this. 
Make images for love and delight and to visit kings and high lords in the day 
of the Moon, when she is waxing, and in Sagittarius, Taurus, Cancer or Pisces 
(and if she is with the Dragon's Head it is powerful for workings), and always 
in a mansion fortunate and appropriate for the work, and when the Moon 
is joined to Venus in the hour of Jupiter, and Jupiter is in Pisces, Sagittarius 
and Cancer and the Moon is with him. Make images for evil conversely, that 
is, when the Moon is in a malefic mansion and conjoined to malefic planets, 
or aspecting them by square or opposition. When you do this, your work 
will turn out as you wish in all things. Note also that working with images is 
better done at night than in the daytime in all of the aforesaid. 
What is necessary in these workings, and cannot be dispensed with, is 
the union of your whole will and belief in the work, so that the power of 
your spirit is united with the power of the heavens; then all things will be 
accomplished effectively. Plato says in his book of aphorisms71 that when 
someone speaks a word with intention, and belief concords with it, whoever 
hears it is moved; and the converse, if you wish to do the contrary. This is the 
root of uniting the will with belief in prayer, and this first of all in asking that 
70 
Infirmitates mechanicas in the text; probably a misprint for "melancholic 
illnesses." 
71 
Not an actual work by Plato the Greek philosopher, but an apocryphal 
work attributed to him. 
ilBoob 5 Chapter 5 
45 
which you wish to ask from that Lord to whom you ought to pray. 
Next, it necessarily is required that the working of these operations be 
hidden from other people and from the light of the Sun, nor should they be 
done in any place where the Sun may enter, and no other person should learn 
about your workings, unless it be one who is faithful to you and believes in 
the work, neither a mocker nor a disbeliever in the work and the powers of 
the spirits of heaven, or in their powers having power in this world, or that 
the work is done by these spirits. To confirm this, Thabit ibn Qurra^ says 
in the book he wrote, On Images, where he says that the science of images 
is the nobler part of astrology. Further on he says that a body that lacks life 
is deficient in spirit. He says this concerning images that are not made in a 
proper and opportune time, are therefore not apt to receive the spirits of the 
planets, and therefore are similar to dead bodies in which the spirit is absent. 
When they are made in a proper and opportune time as they ought, they 
receive spirits and infused powers from the planets and are similar to living 
bodies, from which follow miraculous effects. 
Aristotle71 says in his book of images that those who have images 
proceeding from the seven planets are better and higher, and when fortune 
smiles upon them, it is more durable. He means to say this about attracting 
heavenly spirits and virtues to earth. He also says concerning the names 
of spirits that, when anyone invokes them and wishes to draw down the 
corresponding spirits, that the latter descend with all their might in their 
hour, and they kill the one who invoked them, unless he is well trained and 
knowledgeable of the names of those spirits and the planets corresponding 
to their works, from which they have been drawn, and which conveys them 
to the world of matter. This is what is said by some of those who work 
with the mighty names, who say that the virtues of them change according 
to the nature of the things proper to them, and accomplish miracles in the 
world. The greater part of those who work with the aforesaid names disagree 
with this. I have made a single book of these names and how we ought to 
understand them, and revealed this in the exposition of all of them. 
I wish to return to the words of Aristotle, in the place where he says of 
magical words that they cannot pass beyond the circle of the heavens, nor is 
anything like them held to be able to command spirits, for words do not have 
such a power except by the command of God the glorious and exalted, who 
j p 
Thabit ibn Qurra was a native of Harran, the last Pagan city in 
Mesopotamia, and wrote numerous books on astrology and magic. On Images (De 
'magmibus) is one of the few detailed sources discussing the kind ol image magic 
taught by Picatrix. 
7 3 
The Greek philosopher Aristotle had many magical works credited to him 
•n the Middle Ages, none of which he actually wrote. The references to Aristotle in 
Cicatrix are to several of these pseudonymous occult works. 
5° 
jGL&e Picatrip-JLiber Kubeiw Edition 
moves the spirits about by his command and sends them even to the center of 
the earth. Thus says Aristotle. 
All the wise who have spoken of this science agree that in working with 
magical images, words and prayers help in combination with substances and 
actions. The sage Thoth says: words in images are as the spirit in a body, 
moving spirits and powers toward such a work, insofar as the words of the 
magus are joined with his will and certitude, because out of these latter factors 
is made noble that which completes the images and the words we say. Those 
that are here described are those who speak words corresponding to the works 
that are considered in our volumes. 
For example, if you wish to work with an image for love and unity, speak 
in this way: "Let this man N. be joined to this woman N. as fire and air and 
water and earth are joined; and let his spirit be moved toward hers as the rays 
of the sun move the light of the world and its virtues; and let her and her 
actions be made in his sight like the heaven with the stars that compose it, 
or trees with their flowers. Let the spirit of each be raised up and subtilized 
by the spirit of the other as the waters flow over the earth, and let each of the 
aforesaid be unable to eat, or drink, or dance, or take pleasure in anything 
without the other." Alternatively, "Let N. be joined to N. and conjoined with 
her, as fire, air, and water with earth; and let him so be moved toward her as 
the rays of the Sun move the light of Earth and its virtues; and let they and 
their works be coupled together in their vision as heaven is conjoined with 
its stars and trees with their flowers. Let his spirit be thus raised on high and 
sublime above the spirit of N., as the water is raised up over the earth; and as 
N.," and so forth. 
If you perform a ceremony to separate one person from another or to 
place enmity between them, say this: "I divide and tear apart this person from 
this person by the virtues of these spirits and planets, as the light is divided 
from the darkness;" and thereafter, "Let enmity and ill will enter between 
these two, just as fire and water are inimical to each other." 
If you wish to join someone with some woman, or with many others, say 
this: "Let the will of such and such a woman (if you do this for one woman) 
or all of these (if you do it for all of them) be bound, and take possession of 
this work by the strength and power of the spirits and planets, as the masses 
and veins of the mountains bind together the stones thereof." 
If you wish to dissolve this binding for someone, say this: "Let the 
binding of the will of such and such a man, which has been bound and 
constrained to such and such a woman, be unbound and dissolved and 
destroyed by the virtue of the spirits and planets, as wax is melted by the 
fire, and as the Sun destroys the shadows and their spirits, and as the snow is 
consumed by the heat of the Sun." 
ilBoob 3 Chapter 5 
45 
If you wish to prevent people from speaking ill74 of you or of anyone else 
you wish, say this: "1 cover this person with a cover of shining light, and I 
cut off the tongues of people from him, and I cover their eyes with a spiritual 
cover, drawing from them all evil enchantments; and I cut off their tongues 
and their evil wills." 
Beyond this, if you wish to have people speak ill of someone and hate 
him, say this: "Let this person be broken up and destroyed by the virtue and 
power of these spirits and planets, as the rays of the sun break up and destroy 
the thickness and density of clouds, and let their spirits be affixed to the 
tongues of wicked men so that they will wound him as arrows and catapult 
stones wound the body. 
Be careful that when you do any of the aforesaid workings, you do not 
• make any mistake in any of the aforementioned that is not in keeping with 
the working that you do; rather, say things that will strengthen your work 
and fill it out. Keep the teachings of this chapter well and diligently, because 
they are of great advantage and usefulness in the image workings you do; 
proceeding and continuing as said here, you will be able to compose all the 
images in the world. For those things out of which images are constructed 
ought to be similar and proportionate to the nature of that for which the 
image is composed, whether for good or for evil. I intend also to explain 
hereafter those things belonging to every planet you like among the metals, 
animals, trees, colors, incenses and sacrifices. You may assist yourself thereby 
in all your workings, just as a physician works with many medicines and 
substances, and with the obedience of the sick person in observing diets and 
taking medicines; in this way the physician obtains his goal. 
Now the whole foundation of these operations is in observing the 
motions of the planets and constellations. Thus the ancient Greek sages 
were accustomed to observe a planet, watching until it was in its proper 
geuzahar75. They placed it in the degree of the midheaven, and burned an 
incense appropriate to the planet, and made sacrifices with prayers likewise 
corresponding to the planet, and asked that whatever they willed, they would 
obtain. They said also to work similarly with a planet when it was rising, and 
similarly accomplished what they willed. It should be noted that the aforesaid 
workings were more certain if the planet was strong in the natal chart of those 
people who performed the working. All this you should understand, for 
because of it you will be able to accomplish whatever you wish. 
74 
Bv "speaking ill" the author clearly means something more magically 
dangerous tnan spreading hostile gossip. 
75 
A transliteration of the Arabic astrological ternijawzahirr, or planetary 
node—the points at which the planets apparent path seen from Earth intersect the 
ecliptic. 
52 
Kfyz WattiX'Wbzt 
Uubeufi t u i t i o n 
Chapter Six 
In what degree everything exists in the universe, and how it is known 
that man is a lesser world and corresponds to the greater world 
t
ou should know that knowledge is that which is truly noble and 
exalted, and whoever studies it and makes use of it receives its 
nobility and exaltation. Knowledge is what puts things in their 
rder, because when one thing is known, another presently appears. 
He alone is perfect who attains the highest level of knowledge, and delights 
in and loves that level of knowledge. They were called "philosophers" in 
Greek , and in Latin this word is properly interpreted "lovers of knowledge.""6 
Whoever does not strive for knowledge is defective and weak in authority, and 
therefore ought not to be called human, despite having the name, form, and 
figure of a human being. 
If such a person were to strive to learn knowledge, he would learn from it 
that he indeed is a human being, that he is a little world similar to the great 
world, and that he is a body together with a rational spirit, whole, animate, 
and reasoning, and that by these three spirits" he is set apart from all other 
things in the world, and from all other living things, inasmuch as he has 
reason. This word "reason" denotes the capacity for knowledge, because he is 
able to recognize appearances, and determine that they are not realities, and 
direct his mind to whatever is in the world and in whatever place (that is, in 
the world) by his knowledge and his consciousness, and retain therein the 
power and potential of all that he hears. By this he experiences through his 
consciousness whatever happens in the world and in man, that is, in the little 
world, for this latter is similar to the greater world, with which it corresponds 
in its form and the things found in it. 
He is similar to the animals in all natural things, but he is separated from 
the animals by his crafts and knowledge. He has six motions;78 he has hard 
bones, all ordered by nature in straight lines, which are moved by the parts 
beside them; he has fingers and hands composed of straight lines; and he has 
a round and valuable head. He receives knowledge and literacy and discovers 
crafts, and gives up all animal things; and these are not given up by any other 
animal. He laughs and weeps, and gives voice to his sorrow as he sheds tears. 
In him is God's virtue and the knowledge of justice so that he might govern 
cities. There is an image in him, having light within it, of which his body is 
76 
In Greek philosophos means "lover of knowledge." 
77 
The vital, animal, and rational spirits. 
78 
That is, the ability to move forward, backward, left, right, up, and down. 
ilBoob 55 Chapter 5 
45 
an image/1' He is powerful in spirit and harmonious in his form. He knows 
what helps him, and what harms him. He perfects arts and professions, while 
arts and professions are not given to other living things. He discovers subtle 
crafts and subtleties in them, and makes miracles and wonderful images, and 
retains the forms of knowledge. By all these things he is separated by all other 
living things. 
God made him the arranger and discoverer of His wisdom and 
knowledge, and the expounder of His qualities, and the receiver of all 
things in the world by the prophetic spirit or the treasury of wisdom, which 
comprehends all things and their combinations that exist in the great world. 
Man himself also comprehends all intelligences and compositions of things in 
this world by his senses, while none of these comprehend him; and all things 
serve him, while he serves none of them. With his voice he may imitate any 
animal he pleases, and make forms similar to them with hos own hands, and 
count and describe them and explain their nature and works with his words. 
By contrast, no animal has the power to understand man, or to change its 
voice or imitate the voice of another;80 for example, chickens, lions, and dogs 
cannot change their voices to one another's, while man himself has the power 
in his natural voice to make all the other sounds of the animals, and to change 
their forms and similitudes as he wishes. He chooses useful habits, and directs 
other animals in them, and reveals them to animals. 
Man has a dense body and a subtle spirit, for part of him is subtle and the 
other part dense. The subtle part belongs to life, and the dense part to death; 
the medium of the one is mobile, and of the other is fixed; the one medium 
is formed and the other formless; the one medium is night and the other 
day; one is light and the other darkness, one visible and the other hidden, 
one perceives and the other only exists in perception, one presses down and 
the other is pressed down. The one part is ashamed of evil works, and makes 
what it chooses, and repents of other works. It is composed of fine and subtle 
matter; it contains in itself the density of the earth, the subtlety of the air, the 
heat of the fire and the coldness of the water, out of which it is made equal in 
motion by its own vital power. It knows the heat of fire because of the heat 
that is in man, and the coldness of water by the coldness revealed in him; and 
in this way every element out of which he is made is known in him. 
The form of his head is the form of heaven, and its figure is similar to 
heaven's rotundity. More generally, the form of every subtle thing is joined to 
him. 
The universal form of man is the container of the form of the universal 
79 
The augoeides, the luminous or celestial body. 
80 
Apparently the author of the Picatrix had never encountered parrots, 
cockatoos, and the like. 
54 
Wgi 
^ e a t r v - J L i b e r aftubeu* c o i t i o n 
spirit, and the universal spirit is the container of the universal consciousness, 
and universal consciousness is the form of the light from which consciousness 
proceeds. Thus light is the material of universal consciousness, which is 
higher than all inferior things, and matter is always inferior to light and 
simpler than it. Thus man is completed out of the composite human form 
which is served by all other bodies, and itself is conjoined with other natures. 
Whoever desires to know all this ought to be pure, inclined to virtue, 
clean and free from all bodily filth and all disturbing thoughts, because one 
who is thus disposed is able with his consciousness to seek and behold and 
attain certainty in this matter. 
Now, though, in speaking of the foregoing we have deviated from the 
intent of this book, for it and its consciousness, are the roots of those things 
on which this book, which is about the science of magic, is grounded. If 
you labor unceasingly in knowledge and in matters of the intellect and in 
perception of those things that are, then no matter what happens, you will be 
able to search out and understand sorcery and magic.81 Plato says as much 
in the book he wrote called Timaeus, which goes on at great length in words 
and reasoning about forms. He expounded this reason very well where it says 
that in occult matters, it is the habit of the wise to cover up and conceal their 
knowledge in such a way that the foolish are not able to discover it. Another 
sage named Zadealis wrote something similar in his book, where it says in 
these matters to be hidden and profound. 
The concealment and profundity of words is the subtlety of the wise 
in their reasonings, so that they cannot be understood without much 
contemplation. Their meaning lies hidden therein until intelligence extracts 
it from its concealments, and then it is extracted from a different meaning 
that is understood by the intellect at first glance. This science of magic is 
divided into two parts, of which one is manifest, and the other deeply hidden. 
The part deeply hidden is profound, and there are profound perceptions that 
cannot be grasped except with others that come before them through hard 
work, until their relationship becomes apparent and they are uncovered. 
If anyone thoroughly studies this according to the dictum just given, he 
will have all that he desires, and secrets will be opened to him, and thereby 
he will attain what he wishes. The byways and highways leading to this 
attainment are many, however. Some of them are to take proofs from the 
manifest and apply them to the hidden, and returning the branches to the 
root in order to join them together, and to assemble in one's consciousness 
and thought the credible sayings of saintly men or of some particular saint. 
In this way you will reach completion and perfection, and you will attain 
81 
The text uses both nigromancia and magica, and so the first has been 
translated here as "sorcery." 
ilBoob 7 Chapter 5 
45 
what you wish, and the manifest and concealed meaning of these words will 
be revealed to you. Likewise, you will be granted the right to pass freely on 
the roads just mentioned, so that you will be able to attain knowledge and 
penetrate and uncover hidden things—because by each of the aforesaid roads 
you will be able to attain what you wish, and understand knowledge and its 
meanings, and understand all things, and perceive all things in their proper 
order. 
Chapter Seven 
In what degree everything in the universe exists, and many 
other profound things, hidden by the wise, that we intend to 
reveal in this book of ours 
11 things in the world are ordered in grades according to the things 
that govern them. The first of all things of this world, nobler, higher, 
and more perfect than anything found in the world, is God Himself, 
who is the shaper and creator of all. There follow in order consciousness or 
intellect; after consciousness, spirit; and after spirit, matter, and this matter82 
is immobile, unalterable, and immobile. After this comes the sphere of 
nature, which is called the prime mover of all things moved, and is the source 
of all generation and corruption that happens in the world. Next comes the 
sphere of the fixed stars, and below this are found the other sphere in order 
down to the sphere of the Moon. Below this is found universal matter—that 
is, the first matter83—in which is the pattern of all things of this world, which 
are within this first matter but are not apparent. After this matter come the 
elements, which are manifestations of this universal matter, for the elements 
do not have their operations or effects in matter.8"1 After the elements in order 
come minerals, and after them plants, then animals, then rational animals. 
This order is found out of a diversity of other orders, for other orders descend 
from the intellect, which is nobler and higher than all other created things, 
and proceed from higher to lower until they reach the sphere of the Moon, 
and then proceed from the lower to the higher until they reach humanity, 
which is nobler than any other thing existing under the sphere of the Moon. 
82 
The quintessence, the substance that in medieval physical theory forms the 
spheres of heaven. Later in this chapter it is termed materia alta, "high matter." 
83 
The first matter or prima materia of the alchemists. 
84 
That is, matter is not a creation of the elements; the elements are processes 
within matter. 
E&e PicatrtF-Jlfljer UuUetw coition 
For in humanity knowledge, wisdom, and inquiry are made complete in 
manifestation. 
Because of this you ought to know that those who labor for knowledge 
should grasp how these proceed in order. Those who work at this gain a 
better fortune, and avoid that which the sages have said: there is nothing 
worse among human beings than a student who wants to look sophisticated 
but not to have knowledge. For they do not gain knowledge, unlike those 
who work faithfully at it, and one who has no knowledge is not human except 
in an equivocal sense. 
You should know also that what is found in the world has other orders 
and other divisions than the one given here, intended to sharpen the intellect 
so that it may be more practiced in learning. Afterwards, direct your 
attention to these, and you will understand the secrets of the wise. The order 
thereof is as follows: first comes the principle, then the high matter, then the 
elements, then matter, then form, then nature, then body, then growth, then 
animal, then human, then male, then the individual person being named. 
The first principle is more universal than high matter, because it is said to 
be above matter and accident, and it is not called matter except as the basis 
of bodies. Matter is more universal than the elements, because matter is 
without combination, and the elements cannot exist without combination. 
The elements are more universal than other materials, because an element 
is a simple body and receives qualities, and matter is a coadunation85 of 
the elements ordered to receive form. Matter is more universal than form, 
because it is simple before its reception of form, and when it receives form 
it becomes a combination of matter and form—for example, the way that 
clay is the material of a vase and wood is the material of a footstool. When 
they receive motion and adaptation, their virtue is mixed, and becomes 
nature. When natures are united and receive color, increase, and decrease, 
the result is a body. Bodies are divided between those that grow and those 
that diminish; those that grow are divided between animals and non-animals, 
and animals are divided between humans and nonhumans, and humans are 
divided between male and female, and males into individuals known one by 
one. Matter is a coadunation of the elements ordered for the reception of 
form. Matter is divided into two parts;8'' one is simple matter, which receives 
nothing except the form of the elements earth, air, water and fire, and is 
transmuted from one material substance to another. The other is universal 
matter disposed to receive all forms composed of the simple qualities heat, 
cold, dryness and wetness, and is not transmuted from one material substance 
85 
A technical term of medieval physics, coadunation means "bringing 
together as one." 
86 
These are respectively the lower and higher matter discussed earlier. 
Boob 31 Chapter 7 
57 
to another. The wise have called the first of these, that which is disposed to 
receive all diverse forms, while the other is named for the part of nature which 
is the body by which all of it is directed and fulfilled. 
All that we have said in this context we say only to sharpen the intellect 
and illuminate awareness, because the aforesaid words and reasons that we 
have stated are spiritual images and the word that Adam received form the 
Lord God. They cannot be understood except by the sages who have labored 
faithfully in knowledge and have understood how created beings attain truth. 
You should understand all of this and retain it in your intellect, because what 
we have said up to this point in this book of ours constitute the foundations 
of the art of magic, if you understand it well. 
C&iw entw tfjc fittt boob of t&e most fllnttrfon* p&Uoflop&er Picatru; 
Orion 
Boob 2Ctoo 
Book Two 
59 
ere begins the second book, which discusses in general terms the 
figures of heaven and the motion of the eighth sphere, and their 
effects on this world. Here are the chapters of Book Two: 
Chapter One: First is shown how to learn this science. 
Chapter Two: The figures of heaven and their secrets. 
Chapter Three: All the works of the planets, the Sun, and the 
Moon. 
Chapter Four: The motion of the eighth sphere and the 
fixed stars. 
Chapter Five: The division of this science among nations, 
and what part of it is possessed by each nation. 
Chapter Six: The power of magical images, and the varieties 
of them that exist, and how magical images can receive the 
power of the planets, and how works are accomplished by 
magical images, and this is the root of the science of magic 
and of magical images 
Chapter Seven: H o w to work dialectically in this science 
of magical images, and what part this ought to have in this 
science. 
Chapter Eight: The order of natural things, and how they 
may enter into this science. 
Chapter Nine: Examples of figures and the forms of images 
that summon the aid of the planets. 
Chapter Ten: The stones proper to each planet and the 
formation of figures. 
Chapter Eleven: The figures of the decans and signs and 
their effects. 
Chapter Twelve: The figures and degrees of the signs 
according to the opinion of the Hindus, and how they 
6o 
ic Picatrij^&iber Kubeua Ctrttfon 
proceed according to the contemplations of this science, and 
in what manner the virtues of superior bodies are attracted 
according to the opinions of the same, with notable secrets. 
Boob 33 Chapter i 
Chapter One 
How it is possible to learn this science 
C
he wise who are endowed by nature with intelligence never 
cease nor neglect to seek and inquire that they might learn and 
understand the secrets of the sages, who sealed them up in their 
books and wrote them in hidden words, that the aforesaid might search them 
out by careful investigation until they attain what they desire; but those who 
are stupid and lacking in intelligence will never reach it or arrive at it. Yet 
the motive that drives me proceeds from investigating magic and forbidden 
things, in which 1 prospered from the days of my youth."" I studied Ptolemy's 
Centiloquium, in which it is said that all things in this world obey the celestial 
forms. Indeed all the sages agree in this, that the planets have influences and 
powers in this world, by which all things in it are made and transformed 
by the movements of the planets through the signs. For this reason sages 
understand that the foundation of magic is the movement of the planets. 
I wish to present the following example, which I learned from a certain 
sage who labored in this science, who stayed in Egypt in the royal palace. 
There also dwelt a certain youth who came from a region in India, and who 
had progressed far by much study in the aforesaid science. 
This sage said to me that, while he and this youth were talking together, 
they heard the voice of someone lamenting that he had been stung by a 
poisonous scorpion and was about to die. When he heard this, the youth 
took a piece of cloth from his purse, within which were seals"" that smelled 
strongly of incense. He instructed that one of these be given to the man in a 
drink, and he would recover at once. The sage said that he rose up at once, 
desiring to learn more and find out the reason for this, received one of the 
seals from the youth's hands and gave it to the victim of the scorpion sting in 
a drink, as he had instructed; and at once the victim made an end to his cries 
°f woe, and was saved. 
The sage said that he then inspected the seal, and saw that it had the 
figure of a scorpion on it. When he asked the youth what had sealed it, the 
youth showed him a gold ring set with an engraved bezoar"1' bearing the figure 
l 
Awry reference to Isaiah 47:12, "Stand now with thine enchantments, and 
with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast labored from thy youth; if so 
thou mayest be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail." 
. 
"That is, pieces of wax or some similar substance in which a seal had been 
1111 pressed. 
89, 
Bezoars are stonelike masses found in the stomachs of goats, sheep, and 
"ther grazing animals. In the Middle Ages they were considered a powerful cure for 
Poisoning. 
6i 
iBfratrfc-JUber JCtabeiw tuition 
of a scorpi°n- The sage inquired of him what the figure was and by what 
secret influences it accomplished what I have described. The youth answered 
that the figure w a s made when the Moon was in the second face of Scorpio, 
and this was the secret of the power of the ring. This was what the sage said 
to me. I then made a figure of the same sort at the prescribed time, with 
which I sea'ed and suffumigated seals like the ones he described, and with 
them worked wonders at which everyone marveled. 
For this reason you must realize and understand that no one can realize 
and understand the virtues and powers of the heavens in this little world 
unless they have studied the natural and mathematical quadrivium,'"' and 
whoever is ignorant of these sciences will be imperfect in his knowledge 
of the mov e r n e nts of heaven, nor will he be able to understand them, nor 
draw to himself what he wishes, because the compositions and foundations 
thereof are drawn from these subjects. Whoever is ignorant of arithmetic 
and geometry will be unable to calculate the motions of the celestial bodies, 
nor their returns and transits, nor to grasp the motions of those things by 
which the understanding is formed in arithmetic and geometry. Similarly 
you must learn music'" to understand the proportions and numbers of things, 
and in what manner celestial things correspond in love and hatred with 
terrestrial actions, and why the effects of celestial bodies are more apparent 
in one earthly thing than another. Indeed, anyone who does not grasp these 
proportions lacks any understanding of how these effects come to be, nor will 
such a person be able to work out the correspondences between causes and 
effects or vice versa"'. 
Likewise he who neglects the natural sciences will not be able to 
understand the processes of generation and corruption, and their causes, 
because if he does not know these things, he will not be able to understand 
or apply the effects that celestial bodies have, or the powers they exert over 
terrestrial bodies. Similarly, one who is ignorant of metaphysics will be 
unable to learn or understand how celestial virtues are infused in some 
terrestrial places and not in others. Therefore it may be concluded that 
no one will be able to understand or apply this science perfectly except for 
one who learns its orders and foundations, which no one will be able to 
learn except a philosopher who has extracted everything from the parts of 
philosophy we have already named. For this reason no one will be able to a 
attain to attain to perfection in this science except a perfect philosopher.'" 
90 
The four Pythagorean sciences of arithmetic, geometry, music, and 
^"''"''"^Vlusic in medieval theory includes the study of proportions and ratios. 
92 
That is, work out celestial relationships by comparing them with earthly 
p h e n o m e i ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
^ 
chapter 5, where the sciences just n a m e d feature in a list 
Boob 3 3 Chapter 2 
Chapter Two 
The images of heaven and their secrets 
3
t must be known that to speak of the images of heaven is very difficult 
and profound, because all the wise have enclosed and concealed this 
work as far as they were able. I will explain to you the reason for this 
concealment, especially as those who seek and desire to study the aforesaid 
science, and to attain their desire to understand every form and image, may 
study the great book of images that was composed by the sage Rozuz, who in 
that book gave all the images and forms well and completely. 
The ascensions of the images of heaven are of two manners,9'' of which 
one is the 48 forms drawn from the constellations. This is what we see 
changing according to the rising and setting of the fixed stars, which 
are changed from sign to sign, and other images of heaven such as the 
constellations of the Dog, the Bear, the Rooster, and the like. All these images 
change from sign to sign and from place to place, and do not simply move in 
accordance with the heavens as a whole.1'5 The constellations in the signs of 
the Zodiac change much more than the others, because in a thousand years 
they move from face to face. Those constellations that are around the poles, 
on the other hand, do not move visibly in the same thousand years because 
they move together in a small circle, which is why, even in a thousand years, 
they do not appear to move. This manner is called the way of constellations. 
The second manner calculates the images according to the opinion of the 
Hindus, who arrange them in this way: in the first face of Aries there rises 
a man with red eyes and a large beard, wrapped in a garment of white linen, 
seeming to make great gestures, and wearing a great white cloak tied around 
him with a rope, and standing on one foot as though regarding something in 
front of him. In the second face of Aries rises a woman wrapped in a linen 
cloak, clad in red garments, having only one leg, and with a face similar to 
that of a horse, full of anger, and seeking garments, ornaments, and sons. In 
the third face of Aries rises a man colored red and white, with red hair, angry 
and restless, having a sword in his right hand and a staff in his left, and clad 
in red garments; and he is learned, and a perfect master of iron working, and 
desires to do good, but cannot. In this way they proceed to the last face of the 
"f rile studies a sage must pursue in order to practice magic successfully. 
That is, the apparent movement of the heavens can be tracked in two 
a y s~7nrst, by means of the constellations (patterns formed by the visible stars), and 
Wild, by means of the signs and decans (divisions of the ecliptic). The signs of the 
ocliac, though they have the names of constellations, actually belong to the second 
Wtegory. 
& 
' 
This and the following passage refer to the precession of the equinoxes. 
Clje Wattiy%1bet Uubeua CUittori 
signs. 
Next you should learn that they do not calculate these figures in any way 
except from the nature of the stars and signs. In this way you will be able 
to understand what was said above concerning the second face. All their 
sayings are of this sort. What I have said up to this point, you will be able to 
understand by using your senses and your imagination, and thus you will be 
able to make all things according to your wishes. 
Abenoaxie96 said likewise in his book, which he translated from the 
language of the Nabateans, which was called Timachanin, and speaks of the 
triplicities of the signs. One of them he named the watery triplicity, and 
wrote there what he said about the northern constellations. This is what he 
said: When someone seems to speak of water, a river, a swamp, or any other 
thing similar to them, you ought to understand that its work is in water.97 In 
the same way, all the other figures of the triplicities that are assigned to fire, 
earth, or air, should be understood in the same way. This is the way that 
Tumtum98 proceeded, along with all the other sages who discussed the figures 
and degrees of heaven. 
This is what they said about the names of the degrees, and they also 
said the same thing when they gave examples of their forms in their places, 
because all these are signs by which you will be able to understand the powers 
and workings of the degrees. Thus you ought to interpret them in the same 
way. As an example of the foregoing, when someone refers to a mutilated 
head and mutilated hands, he means by this phrase death and weakness and 
the way of one planet with others, because all these are ways to understand 
the effects of the planets, and how other bodies are strengthened by them, so 
that marvels, and the effects of the planets in these bodies, become apparent. 
In this way you should understand the whole art of magic. 
You should know that the effects of the planets are many and varied, 
and these effects are different in every degree of the heavens, that is, when a 
particular planet is in a particular degree, or when it is conjunct with other 
planets there. If you desire to know the number of their possible effects, that 
is, of every planet in every degree of the heavens, multiply 360 seven times, 
and the product will be 2520; and every one of these aspects has diverse 
effects by itself. If you then multiply 360 six times, the result, the number 
of conjunctions of any two planets in a single degree, will be 2160; and these 
96 
Ibn Wahshiyyah (Abu Bakr Ahmed ibn 'Ali ibn Qays al-Wahshiyyah al-
Kasdani al-Qusayni al-Sufi), the translator of The Nabatean Agriculture. 
97 
That is, these apparently geographical references actually refer to the watery 
triplicity of the signs of the Zodiac, and are used to conceal techniques of astrological 
magic. This same form of concealment appears frequently in Picatrix. 
98 
Texts on astrology and geomancy attributed to the legendary astrologer 
Tumtum al-Hindi, or Tumtum the Hindu, were much circulated among Arabic 
occultists in the early Middle Ages. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 2 
aspects similarly have power and cause wonders in this world. If, however, 
you multiply 360 five times, the result is the number of conjunctions of three 
planets in a single degree, or 1800, and these aspects similarly have power 
and cause wonders in this world. If you multiply 360 four times, the result 
is the number of conjunctions of any four planets in a single degree, or 1440, 
and these aspects similarly have power and cause wonders in this world. If 
you then multiply 360 three times, the result is the number of conjunctions 
of any five planets in a single degree, or 1080, and these aspects similarly 
have power and cause wonders in this world. If you multiply 360 twice, 
the result is the number of conjunctions of any six planets in one degree, or 
720; and these aspects similarly cause wonders in this world like the ones 
already mentioned. If you multiply 360 once, the result is the number of 
conjunctions of all seven planets in a single degree, or 360; and these aspects 
similarly have power and cause wonders in this world. This is the way in 
which the sage first mentioned above'" understood things, when it is written 
of the figures of heaven and their judgments, what a given figure signifies, and 
likewise about the motions of the seven planets and the degrees of the signs. 
The coadunated sum of these figures is 10,080, and each of these aspects has 
powers and accomplishes marvels. 
After this, however, the same sage first mentioned above said that when 
you wish to learn these aspects, you should do it in the following way. Put 
one of the seven planets in one degree and another in a different degree, 
and repeat this with all the seven planets, and then put them in any two 
degrees you wish; and do the same thing in every degree of the heavens, of 
which there are 360. This way is longer than the one already described, but 
more accurate, and thereby you will be able to understand the powers and 
effects of these aspects in this world. When you have done this, you should 
calculate the conjunctions made by the seven planets, as they travel through 
the degrees, with the fixed stars, as well as their applications to the fixed stars, 
and the separations of their movements from them and the separation of the 
fixed stars from them.1"" Then you should commit all this to memory, and 
understand it well, so that you will be able to calculate aspects. Be careful 
not to reveal the properties of these aspects to anyone, except those who are 
destined to receive them. 
That is, Abenoaxie (Ibn Wahshiyyah). 
' " " 
This passage outlines a time-consuming but very thorough method of 
•earning the magical dimension of astrology, in which the student places two planets 
at random in a hypothetical chart, calculates the effects of each planets placement 
and of the relationship between the two planets, and then repeats this with different 
P'anets and positions, factoring in the fixed stars as well, until he can determine the 
'Magical effects of any planetary aspect at a glance. 
66 
PicatrirJliber Kubeu* (Coition 
Chapter Three 
All the works of the planets, the Sun, and the Moon 
ow some sages, speaking of the foregoing, have said that the effects 
j 
r^/jof the heavens and their powers in this world are nothing other 
i^^than the increase and decrease of heat."" They have said this 
because they have not understood the wonderful occult properties of the 
planets. They have said that the effects brought about by the Sun, the Moon, 
and the other five planets operating in this world help and strengthen the 
overall effect of the heavens. They have also said that from the motion of the 
heavens, all over motions are revealed, that is, the motions of all seven of the 
planets individually, and from the qualities of the Sun individually may be 
known all the other qualities that arise. 
They say that the Moon has qualities1"2 from which it is possible to know 
and understand all her qualities and effects. The first of her qualities is her 
elongation from the Sun, that is, the period from the time she separates from 
conjunction with the Sun until her first square with the Sun. During that 
time her power increases moisture and warmth, but she affects moisture more 
than warmth. During that time her effects appear in the growth of trees and 
plants, and her power of increase is more apparent in herbs that grow in the 
ground than in trees that rise above the ground. 
The second of her qualities is from the end of the first quarter until her 
opposition with the Sun. During this time her influence is more apparent in 
increasing heat and moisture equally. During this time her influence is well 
shown in the increase of moisture and heat in plants and minerals. When 
she recedes from opposition to her second square with the Sun, at that time 
her power increases moisture and heat, but heat more than moisture. Her 
influence appears more in increasing the bodies of animals, vegetables, and 
those minerals that grow, in all their parts; this is why at this time she works 
more by heat than by moisture. 
From her second square to her combustion by the Sun, the effects, 
motions, and results of her heat appear much abated, so much less than those 
of the three previous periods that the result is opposite in all its effects, being 
moderately drying and strongly cooling. This is said because of her influence, 
which at that time is moderate in humidity; for this reason we are able to say 
that this quarter is moderately dry and very cold. 
101 
This was a theory discussed in the Arab intellectual circles during the 
Middle Ages. 
102 
These "qualities" (qualitates in the original) are the four traditional quarters 
of the Moon's orbit, plus its exact conjunction with the Sun. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
7 
When she is conjunct the Sun within one minute, then she has the 
fifth quality, which the Chaldean sages say is better than any other quality 
of the Moon, and is more powerful than all her other aspects. The sages of 
Persia, however, say that the power and weakness, increase and decrease of 
the effects of this fifth quality depends on the nature of the sign in which 
the conjunction takes place. The sages of Greece and Egypt, meanwhile, 
agree with what we have already said, that the conjunction with the Sun is 
strongest, but deny what we have said, that this quality of the conjunction is 
better; they assign the latter to the opposition between Moon and Sun, that 
is, when her light is complete. 
All our sages,1113 however, are mutually in agreement that the better 
quality of the Moon is the aspect she makes when she is conjunct to the Sun 
within one minute, and they hold that this fifth quality belongs to the Sun 
and ought to have other interpretations, differing from the interpretations 
assigned to the other four qualities, because it is better and stronger than 
them in all their works. That interpretation is as follows: when the Moon 
conjoins the Sun, she rejoices and is glad, just as a wayfarer rejoices in his 
journey when he reaches his home or its neighborhood; this will be even more 
true of the shaper of all things, and most of all when she will perceive their 
effects beforehand. When she is conjunct with the Sun, she has completed 
her work, which is to diminish what is in excess and increase what is deficient. 
Our sages say likewise that the virtue of the fifth quality has a similar 
effect to the effect of the Sun, and this is a very great thing and a noble 
quality. They say that all composite bodies receive from this the virtues that 
they ought to have, nor should it be understood from the foregoing that the 
Moon causes virtues and workings differing from those of the Sun; rather, 
the Moon reveals the Sun's influence and brings forth works accomplished by 
the Sun; nor do these appear until the Moon manifests those things that were 
previously concealed, and illuminates what had previously been in obscurity. 
These five qualities of the Moon, which she receives out of the aforesaid 
five aspects which she has with the Sun, accord with the qualities of all the 
living things that live within her orbit. Of such are the five ages, that is, 
infancy, childhood, youth, maturity, and age. Likewise are the four times of 
the year—that is, spring, summer, autumn, and winter—and similarly the 
four parts of the world—that is, east, west, south, and north, along the wind 
that is principally assigned to that quarter. The four humors in the body— 
blood, yellow bile, phlegm, and black bile""1—are similar. 
These are the senses and interpretations in which the foregoing material 
1 ( )3 
"Our sages" are the astrologers of the Arabic world. 
The humors were the basis of traditional medicine in the Western world 
from the ancient Greeks to the end of the Renaissance. 
68 
Efft l^lcatrti^iUber Jftobeu* coition 
ought to be taken, most especially because all the foundations of these 
operations derive from the power of the planets, the Sun, and the Moon, 
and from their motions according to the qualities of the degrees that receive 
the forces and powers of the planets in their courses, for the powers pass 
from planet to planet through their aspects. For this reason, one planet will 
receive qualities belonging to the significance of other planets according to the 
different aspects that are formed by their positions in the heavens. 
When any aspect is in force, it is evident that all composite bodies are 
changed and altered in all their changeable qualities during that period of 
time, according to the interaction of the motions of the planets with the signs 
they occupy, and vice versa, and these changes are called separate mutations. 
Those other primary things that we mentioned before, that are the 
foundations and properties of all things, are called common and permanent 
mutations, and they are not changed or altered because, if they suffered any 
alteration or change, the whole universal pattern of things in this world would 
be corrupted and destroyed; for this reason they are permanent and common. 
The conclusion we ought to draw from all that we have said up to this 
point is that everything in the world, and all their qualities, orders and 
ends, are from the aspects of the Moon with the Sun, because this includes 
everything that is contained in trees and composite bodies because of the stars 
and the Moon. This is what causes the greater part of the influence and harm 
they receive from an eclipse of the Moon or other planets that are eclipsed. 
From the Sun, the Moon, and the fixed stars come permanent mutations; 
from these, things suffer change, receiving benefits from good qualities and 
harm from bad ones. Eclipses affect the Sun and Moon and other planets, 
and influence them to the harm of other composite bodies. Do not believe 
for a moment that the Sun or Moon receive any harm in their nature or 
accidents thereby; and we will call this an impediment of the heavens, so that 
you will understand that the reason that harm comes to animals, trees, and 
other composite bodies from eclipses of the Sun, Moon, and the other planets 
happens because the four elements are altered, changed and damaged.1"5 
Next in order, you ought to search for a place"*' appropriate and suitable 
in all its effects and convenient for your workings, noting the true and false 
signs in things that influence this world both in generation and corruption, 
so that the place is the kind that will have great power in the world in 
all its qualities. Similarly, you should seek to make the Moon free from 
impediments and infortunes, and be sure it is not in the Via Combusta, 
105 
One of the central principles of medieval cosmology was that destruction 
only happened in the realm of the four elements; the celestial realm was exempt from 
all generation and corruption. 
106 
That is, a celestial place, a part of the heavens where the Moon will provide 
the influence needed for the working. 
Boob 33 Chapter 3 7' 
because all workings that are ordained when the Moon is in a good quality 
and rightly moving are completed and perfected for good; whatever you 
desire will appear with all its effects, and its duration will be according to 
whether the Moon is slow or fast, and whether it appears in the same sign 
together with one of the infortunes, or descending from the midheaven, or at 
the end of a sign or in the last or next to last degree thereof, for all these harm 
and weaken the Moon. 
This is also the case if the Moon descends to the descendant, or is 
cadent'"7 from the lord of her house"18 and does not aspect him, or is cadent 
from the ascendant or any other angle, or is conjunct the south lunar node, 
because the beginning will not be fulfilled, nor will it have any durability. 
The house of the Moon must not be governed by a planet from which the 
Moon is separating, or one to which the Moon applies from an angle or from 
a succedent house, because when the Moon is cadent from an angle or a 
succedent house, she is not suited to any working. 
The descendant, because of the circle of houses, is opposite to the 
house that is rising. If the Moon is in the ninth house, and the lord of the 
ninth house is cadent from the ascendant, it will be similar to the situation 
described above. If you find the lord of the Moon's house on the ascendant 
or midheaven, or in the eleventh or fifth houses, oriental"" and direct, 
everything will be suitable and appropriate for whatever you intend to do. 
Here is an example. Venus is favorable for all workings related to the 
activities of youth, happiness, and cosmetics, and Jupiter is assigned to the 
deeds of kings, prelates,"" and lords. Similarly, Mercury is favorable for 
all things relating to messengers and scribes, just as the favor of the Sun is 
assigned to royal and great operations and to kings, and as the favor of the 
Moon is associated with learning and news. Thus, according to the aforesaid, 
you ought to examine all workings and relationships that you wish to put into 
effect: that is, you should consider the Sun and Moon and the lords of their 
exaltations, and also the lords of their terms. 
Next you should consider the ascendant and midheaven, because when 
you find these free from the infortunes and untroubled, and with their 
lords in favorable positions, then the work will go well and be accomplished 
107 
Cadent: the cadent houses are the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth of an 
astrological chart. The Moon can be cadent from the lord of her house, when she is 
either 3, 6, 9 or 12 houses or signs from her lord. 
108 
The lord of the Moon's house: the planet that rules the sign in which the 
Moon is located in a given astrological chart. 
109 
The later more simplified explanation is that a planet is oriental to another 
planet if it rises after it, and thus appears further east in the sky; it is occidental if 
it rises before it, and thus appears further west in the sky. More complex, earlier 
definitions exist. 
'10 
Prelates: clergy of high rank. 
7 ° 
Kfye fieatriF-lifter Kubeiw CMtfon 
and its goal will be achieved. This will be even more so if the fortunes are 
luminous1" and appear from the right and are oriental to the lord of the 
ascendant, because planets when they are oriental signify victory and the 
completion of things without difficulty or impediment, and when they are 
occidental, especially when in one of the four angles, they signify sluggishness, 
delay, and the postponement of things. 
If you find the Moon favorably placed but the lord of its house is cadent, 
that shows that the matter under consideration will turn out good in the 
beginning and bad in the end. If you find both the Moon and the lord of 
her house favorably placed, the working will be good in all things and well 
completed, andv you will obtain what you desire, and the end will be good. 
This will be even more so if the lord of the ascendant is a fortune and is in 
the ascendant or another of the angles, of if it is an infortune and favorably 
placed. Even better than this is to have Jupiter or Venus rising or in aspect 
with the ascendant, for then the business at hand will proceed easily and 
obtain a good result, and accomplish its goal easily and swiftly. This will 
be even more so if the Moon is conjunct with one of the fortunes, and that 
fortune is not diminishing in light or retrograde, because this is appropriate 
to any working except for captives who hope to escape from their masters, or 
workings to catch fugitives of any other kind. 
You should pay attention to the Moon in all workings, as the foremost 
of the planets, because she has the most manifest effects and judges all things 
in this world, and to her belong the powers of generation and corruption, 
and she is the mediatrix of their effects; for she received the influences and 
impressions of all the stars and planets, and pours them down onto the 
inferior things of this world. For this reason you should pay attention to 
what we have said above concerning her fortunes and infortunes, and the 
waxing and waning of her light, because after she separates from the Sun her 
powers are balanced; thereafter they change when she is in sextile, square, 
trine, and opposite aspect. Her strength will accord with the nature of the 
planets and stars with which she is conjoined while in the aforesaid aspects. 
If you find the Moon increasing in light, then her virtue and power 
are better and more useful in every working in which you desire to cause 
increase; if you find her decreasing in light, then she will be suitable and 
appropriate for all workings in which you desire to cause decrease. After the 
Moon separates from the Sun, until her sinister square,112 and thence until she 
reaches opposition, she will always be good and appropriate for buying and 
111 
Lucentes in the original. The author may mean that they are increasing in 
light, that is, moving away from the Sun rather than toward him. 
112 
A sinister, or left-handed, square is made when the swifter planet is in a 
later sign of the Zodiac than the slower one. 
Boob 33 Chapter 3 
7' 
selling, seeking judgments and loans, for disputations, and for seeking advice 
on any subject. After she separates from opposition, passing by the dexter 
square"3 and thence to her conjunction with the Sun, she will be good and 
appropriate for seeking loans that we owe, for those who have the goods of 
others to return them, and for wisdom and seeking and inquiring after truth. 
You should know that the ascendant is more fortunate and stronger 
if it has a fortune in the sign that is rising, and also in the second house. 
Furthermore, it should not be concealed from you that the moveable signs, 
especially Aries and Capricorn, are good and appropriate whenever you desire 
to overcome or obtain something; that the common signs are appropriate 
for sorcery and marvelous things; and that the fixed signs are effective in, 
and ordained for, binding and attracting and the performance of magical 
workings. All things that you want to be enduring, and especially great 
works, are suitable for the fixed signs, and likewise attracting spirits into 
things and binding them there. In these things, furthermore, it is best if the 
ascendant be in a common sign and the Moon in a moveable sign, forming 
an aspect to the ascendant. Similarly, in all things that are to endure, put 
the ascendant in a fixed or common sign, the Moon being in a fixed sign, 
applying by a trine or sextile aspect to the ruler of her house, which should be 
free from the infortunes, from combustion, and retrogradation. 
If it is not possible for all these things to be fully considered,"4 then at 
least see that the Moon is applying to one of the fortunes and to the lord of 
the ascendant by a trine or sextile aspect, and always beware of the square or 
opposite aspect, because trine and sextile are the favorable aspects, while the 
unfavorable are square and opposition. Thus when the lord of the Moon's 
house regards the Moon by a friendly aspect, even if it is an infortune, it will 
be favorable for petitions and in all that you wish to do. In all your workings, 
be careful that the Moon is not conjunct the South Node or applying to 
a square or opposition with the infortunes, and always observe in your 
workings the waning of the Moon, for when she wanes, it shows and reveals 
destruction and detriment, slowness and weakness in all things of this world. 
This is the waning of the Moon: that is, when she decreases by light and the 
calendar,"5 and is slow in motion. The state and condition of the Moon is 
good when she is increasing by light and the calendar, and swift of course, nor 
l s s^e regarding Mars by any aspect, because when the waxing Moon beholds 
' '3 
A dexter, or right-handed, square is made when the swifter planet is in an 
earlier sign of the Zodiac than the slower one. 
V / 
Considerari in the original, a neat Latin pun suggesting con-, "with," and 
"(teres, "stars." 
1 ',5 
The Arabic calendar uses lunar months; in the Middle Ages these months as 
calculated bv calendar makers were not always in step with the phases of the Moon, 
thus the author's injunction to check both. 
72 
C&e Picatrij^JLtber ftubeua CWtton 
Mars, this is considered to be a great affliction of the Moon, and when she 
beholds Saturn while waxing, this is a grave affliction. Yet she stands alone 
among the powers and virtues that are above the Earth in the night. You 
should know that it will be shown to be better and more useful, in all our 
workings according to the points just discussed, when the Moon and the 
ascendant are in signs of direct ascension; for when this is the case, the work 
will be completed more rapidly and with swifter effect, and most so when 
they are in common or fixed signs. 
Now of the moveable signs, the most moveable is Aries, then Cancer, and 
then Libra, which is stronger than all other enemies. In the same way you 
should understand that the angles are swifter in all operations, the succeedent 
houses are next, while the cadent houses are slowest. The swiftest of all is 
when a fortune is rising and the Moon is increasing by light and the calendar. 
Note also that the conclusions of things cannot be found out except by the 
triplicity of the Moon and the lord of the ascendant, and by the calculation 
of their places and qualities and aspects, and the aspects they make with the 
planets mutually over time. By the aforesaid the ending of things may be 
judged. 
Dorotheus"6 in his instructions teaches us this, saying that in making 
judgments and elections of things it is necessary to observe the ascendant and 
its lord, and the Moon and the lord of the Moon's house. Be careful of the 
Moon in these elections and judgments, and see that it is not cadent from the 
ascendant"7 if you can possibly avoid this, and even more so, that the lord 
of the ascendant and that of the Moon's house not be the two infortunes, 
applying to an aspect with the Moon from the ascendant or the signs that 
they rule. Be sure in all judgments and elections that the Part of Fortune is 
not cadent from an aspect or conjunction with the Moon, and be careful that 
neither the lord of the Part of Fortune's house nor the part itself is cadent 
from the ascendant after making an aspect with the ascendant or Moon. 
Now if the lord of the ascendant is conjunct the part of fortune, this 
is very good in all workings and all your elections. Take diligent care in all 
your workings that the Moon be not in the third, sixth, eighth, or twelfth 
houses from the Part of Fortune, because this will be ill and inappropriate 
for every manner of business. Note always in all your workings that the 
Moon and ascendant be in signs of direct ascension. You should likewise 
know and understand that the ascendant and fourth house signify and reveal 
all dispositions jointly. If you find the Moon badly placed, and it should 
happen that it is necessary for you to act, and you are not able to delay at all, 
make the Moon cadent from the ascendant, having no part in her, and put a 
1 16 
Dorotheus of Sidon, the great first century C E astrologer. 
117 
That is, in the 3rd, 6th, 9th or 12th houses. 
HBoofe 33 Chapter 3 
73 
fortune in the ascendant, with fortunes rising and ruling the ascendant. This 
is what Dorotheus says. 
You should know that the strength and goodness of the ascendant 
consists of two things, that is, form and fortune, nor should you interpret 
the lord of the ascendant in any other way. Form means that you should put 
on the ascendant something of similar nature, proportion, and quality to the 
intention of your election. Similarity of quality is a condition such as this: 
if you wish to make things happen quickly and complete themselves, or put 
things in motion, or in the houses of kings, or with great sublimity, place the 
ascendant in the fiery signs. Along with this rule is the following similar to it, 
that is, if your working deals with warlike and military matters, put one of the 
signs ruled by Mars on the ascendant. 
You should make fortunate the house of the petition as well as the lord 
of that house, because the place or house of the petition shows and reveals 
what is in the beginning and ordination of the matter, and the lord of the 
petition signifies and reveals the means by which the petition is resolved, and 
the lord of the house where the lord of the petition is found signifies the end 
and outcome of the matter. In the same way, the ascendant shows what is in 
the beginning of the matter, and the lord of the house where the lord of the 
ascendant is found signifies the end of the matter. 
Look also to the part of the petition,"8 for this shows the nature of the 
petition, and also consider its lord, and the lord of the house where the lord 
of the part is placed. Diligently consider how you may position the house 
of the petition as we have described above, and make it fortunate by those 
fortunes that give strength when they are in that house, or applying to it 
with favorable aspects, while the infortunes are cadent from their houses. 
Never place a retrograde planet as the lord of the ascendant or the lord of the 
petition because, if either one is retrograde, the petition will be delayed and 
put at a distance and will not go forward; this is what a retrograde reveals and 
demonstrates. Similarly, all other places should be made fortunate in all their 
qualities. If any of them are retrograde, the effect of the working is destroyed 
at the beginning, and it may not be completed except with labor and peril. 
See also that none of the aforesaid be conjunct to the Sun or Moon, or 
in opposition to them, but rather on the ascendant or in the house of the 
petition or with the part of the petition, and a fortune should be rising, or in 
°ne of the other angles, or in the house of the petition. 
You should know that the Greater Fortune"'' has greater strength and 
' 1 8 
Arabic astrology includes a system of parts—points on the horoscope often 
determined by the relative placement of two planets and one house cusp. The Part 
°f Fortune is a familiar example, but Arabic astrologers used hundreds of others, and 
rnost magical workings can be assigned to one parr or another. 
' ' 9 
The planet Jupiter. 
74 
ICfie l&icattfr-ILfoer Hubeus edition 
power in all petitions, in advanced knowledge, and in laws, while the Lesser 
Fortune1-" reaches out and works in all petitions concerning women's quarrels, 
as well as ornaments and the pleasures of women and their vices and the like. 
Never put the Moon on the ascendant of anything you wish to do, because 
she is the ascendant's enemy, but the Sun is not an enemy of the ascendant, 
for he uncovers things and melts what is frozen. 
Similarly, do not put an infortune on the ascendant, nor in any of the 
angles of the chart, and especially not if the infortune has power in any 
malign place;121 for example, if it be the lord of the eighth house, for this 
reveals loss of merchandise and of exchange and of great lordships; and if that 
infortune rules the sixth house, it shows detriment to the petition on account 
of enemies, servants, illness, imprisonment, or animals; while if that infortune 
rules the twelfth house, it shows impediment and damage to the petition on 
account of misery, conflict, enemies, or by means of imprisonment; while 
if the infortune rules the second house, it reveals and argues for loss in the 
petition from another person on account of wealth, or subservience, or 
because of eating and drinking. 
In all the aforesaid, you should observe all that we have previously said 
and not forget any of these points, but consider them as the foundations of 
the entire magical art. In all workings you perform in the daytime, put a 
diurnal sign of direct ascension on the ascendant, and in workings at night 
put a nocturnal sign of direct ascension on the ascendant. Furthermore, pay 
heed to the Sun and Moon if you can, and see that their hours and lords are 
in strong and fortified places, and do this so that the superior powers and 
strengths are coadunated by contact together, and are joined. In this way 
you ought to consider and arrange the status of what the planets reveal and 
the significance of the work you wish to do, and put them together before 
you begin to work. Thus in all works that you wish to do for love and 
benevolence toward men or women, see that the Moon is received by Venus 
in a trine or sextile aspect, and this is better when in her house or exaltation. 
Note that the trine aspect is that which joins an equilateral triangle, so 
that each side has 120° of the circumference of heaven. A sextile aspect is that 
which connects the six equal sides of a hexagon, and each of these sides has 
60° of the circumference of heaven. A square aspect is that which joins four 
equal sides into a square, and has in each of those sides a division of 90° of the 
circle of heaven. Opposition is when the planets are at the opposite ends of a 
diameter of the sky. 
Now, however, I return to the considerations on which I have been 
120 
The planet Venus. 
121 
That is, the infortune should not rule the sixth, eighth, or twelfth houses, 
which are traditionally unfortunate. 
Booh 33 Chapter ? 
75 
lingering, and I say concerning any working of yours that cannot be delayed 
until the Moon is received by Venus, put them in a trine aspect and received 
by Jupiter or the lord of his house in a trine or sextile aspect; and if you 
cannot do any of these things, get the Moon in a term of Venus, made 
fortunate by Jupiter, and free from the infortunes. If your working is for 
love and benevolence, put the degree of the ascendant in one of the terms 
of Venus. If your working is for acquiring a share in an inheritance, put the 
aforesaid term of Venus on the cusp of the fourth house. Ifyour working 
is for acquiring help from the law, do the same in the ninth house. Ifyour 
working is for faithfulness, and for this you plan and labor, do this in the 
eleventh house, and strengthen the part of fortune by putting it in the house 
of one of the fortunes, or put the lord of its house in reception with a fortune. 
Ifyour working is for success in lawsuits and battles and the like, see that 
Mars is received by the Moon in an amicable aspect. Ifyour working is for 
receiving what is owed to you, have Mars in reception with Saturn. Ifyour 
working is about numbers, writing, or study, have him in reception with 
Mercury. If your work is for pleasing and petitioning kings and lords, have 
Jupiter received as above. If your working is for any other purpose, that is, for 
any of the reasons not included here, let Jupiter be in reception with the lord 
of the ascendant, or else received by the Moon or the ascendant or the part of 
fortune or the part of the petition. Put the lord of the Moon's house, or the 
lord of the ascendant, or the lord of the fourth house as described above, and 
make sure all the foregoing are in places free from the infortunes, and quiet 
and made fortunate by the fortunes, inasmuch as you are able, because these 
places dignify the conclusion of petitions. 
When you wish to ask someone for something, in the hope that goods 
will be allotted to you, make the Moon or the lord of the ascendant receiving 
the almutaz122 and the lord of the petition, and put the Moon or the lord of 
the ascendant in the house of the petition. If you ask about the elderly or 
those who work land, make Saturn the lord of the chart. If your petition is 
about officials, judges, prelates, or rich and generous people, the lord of your 
chart should be Jupiter. If your petition concerns soldiers or men at arms, or 
magisteries, iron, fire, and the like, make Mars the lord of your chart. Ifyour 
petition concerns kings or nobles, make the Sun the lord of your chart. If 
your petition concerns women, or joyful people and the like, or decorators, 
painters, ornaments, actors, those who make pictures on cloth, silk, gilded 
things and so forth, make Venus the lord of your chart. Ifyour petition 
concerns merchants, scribes, teachers, subtle geometricians, and the like, 
"lake Mercury the lord of your chart. If your petition concerns things of a 
122 
The almutaz is the planet ruling a chart, calculated by one of several 
traditional ways; it is also known as almuten. 
16 
C&e Picatrii^lLtber liubeufl dftrttfon 
cold and moist nature, messengers, cases brought before the king, fishermen, 
and the like, make the Moon the lord of your chart. 
Likewise, in all your petitions, make the lord of the ascendant fortunate 
as well as the Moon. Ifyour petition concerns a question of wealth and food, 
place the part of fortune so that it is received by one of the fortunes. Beware 
of having either of the infortunes block the light of the Moon from the 
ascendant, or the contrary;123 nor should either of the infortunes be conjunct 
the lord of the petition, the Moon, or the lord of the ascendant, nor should 
they be in conjunction or any aspect with the lord of the petition, and where 
we spoke of reception before let there also be a trine or sextile aspect with 
one of the fortunes, or similarly with the infortunes, or conjunct with the 
fortunes. Make sure that the lord of the petition is not cadent from one of 
the angles, nor the Sun, the Moon, or the lord of the ascendant. 
If you cannot observe all of these points, however, consider the motion 
of one of the five lords of the petition,12,1 and let it have aspect and reception 
according to the petition, as we have said, and make those two houses well 
received by the fortunes. Make sure that neither infortune is with the lord 
of the Moon's house or with the lord of the fourth house or the lord of the 
ascendant, because if either of the infortunes is as just said, it will ruin, 
destroy and impede the success of your working. 
If you wish to work concerning some issue involving masters and 
servants, see that the Moon and the ascendant are in common signs, free from 
the infortunes. Ifyour working concerns gold, strengthen the Sun and have 
it in relationship to the fortunes above all in your workings, and observe the 
same in all other qualities. 
Thus far I have spoken generally about the judgments of the stars, for if 
you apply yourself to them and understand them as you ought, you will gain 
their benefit in whatever working you may do; and from generalities, you will 
be able to understand and judge particulars. You should be exceedingly careful 
that you never reveal the foregoing or show it to anyone who is not intelligent 
and studious in these matters. You should know that these are the foundations 
and raw materials of magical images, and they are among those secrets of this 
art that are demonstrated in public; and for this reason, serious study of the 
art of astrology was once prohibited by law, because the deep places of that 
science border the things that must be known in learning the art of magic. 
Aristotle spoke of this to King Alexander: "O Alexander, be careful at 
every moment and in all your activities that you conduct yourself according 
123 
This refers to prohibition, when a planet is applying to an aspect or 
conjunction with another planet or point in the horoscope, but a third, hostile planet 
aspects one or the other before the aspect can perfect. 
124 
These are the planets ruling the sign, exaltation, triplicity, term, and the face 
on the degree of the cusp of the house that governs the question. 
HBoofe 33 Chapter 3 
77 
to the motions, aspects, and qualities of the celestial bodies, for if you study 
these things, your desires will be accomplished, and you will have whatever 
you will." This saying is very good and useful, because it indicates the 
difference between the actions of the wise and those of the foolish, who 
are unable to pass beyond practical considerations, and to whom thoughts 
concerning another world are shrouded in darkness; for thoughts concerning 
another world are nothing other than the wisdom that surrounds all sciences 
and all wisdom teachings. 
Chapter Four 
The motion of the eighth sphere and the fixed stars 
/ 0 f V " h e ancient sages who were learned in the magical sciences saw that 
I I I 
the four quarters of heaven1-5 move by eight degrees from west to 
^MtM^^east, then return by eight degrees from east to west, and this motion 
they called the motion of the eighth sphere.1-6 Many of those who produce 
astronomical tables have concealed this motion, and make no mention of 
it, but this motion is of great usefulness in magic. Some of those who make 
astronomical tables include this motion in their tables, and provide numbers 
and calculations by which this motion can always be calculated at will. 
You should by no means surrender this to oblivion, because it is the 
greatest foundation of magical knowledge, for by this motion the figures of 
heaven are changed, which is one of the great secrets of this science. The 
motion of these eight degrees is completed in 640 years, and returns in the 
same period. 
Now it shall be said and revealed to you how greatly it is proper to 
attend to this motion in the science of magic as well as the science of the 
effects of the heavens. This same motion moves the pole of the heaven of 
constellations, moving it from east to west and back again, nor can it move 
otherwise than in these two ways. When this motion proceeds from east to 
west it signifies certain things that are done and accomplished in this world, 
and when it proceeds from west to east it reveals and signifies that other 
things are put into effect in this world. This motion is the motion of the 
25 
The solstitial and equinoctial points, the "four corners of the world." 
y ^ 
This entire chapter discusses the theory of trepidation, a way of interpreting 
Precession of the equinoxes proposed by the Harranian astrologer Tliabit ibn 
X u rra (824-901 CE) 
The theory was that precession moved backwards and forwards 
'» an 8 degree arc, rather than continuing (as it actually does) around the full cycle of 
t l , c Zodiac in a period of 25,920 years. 
78 
E&e Picatri^EUbo: Kubeiw CftJition 
eighth sphere, the sphere of the signs and the fixed stars, a motion that is 
not the same as the motion of the entire heavens.1-" It is proper for you to 
understand this motion and consider it diligently in every working. 
Chapter Five 
The division of this science among nations, and which part of it each 
nation possesses 
fc [ ^ ow I will relate to you that I have seen, from one of the ancient 
l^LJsages, a certain very great wonder pertaining to this art, which at 
j f f 
~ this time I have decided to reveal. This explains that this science 
is divided into three parts. Of these the first is the science of magic, and 
those who study and practice it most are those we have named Azahabin, 
who are captive Chaldean slaves. The second is the science of the stars, and 
of praying to them with suffumigations, sacrifices, prayers, and writings; and 
those who are most zealous in this science are the Greeks, who are very subtle, 
knowledgeable and intelligent in it, that is, in astrology, and they have true 
knowledge because astrology is considered the root of the entire science of 
magic. The third part, in turn, is the science that works with suffumigations, 
sayings and words properly assigned to these things, as well as the science of 
calling spirits together by these words and sending them away again. The 
Hindus are most versed in this last science, and those from Liemen and the 
Nabateans in Egypt practice it most. Each of the aforesaid divisions has its 
own theoretical foundation and practical essence. 
It should be noted and made clear that the Hindus have their strength 
and power through words, with which they are freed and healed from deadly 
poisons without medicine. Similarly, they have sayings and words by which, 
whenever they wish, someone will be evilly vexed by demons, and in the same 
way it is possible to transmute the senses solely by hearing the aforementioned 
words, and the Hindus cause any change they wish to cause by virtue of these 
same words.12* Similarly, they have musical instruments cleverly constructed, 
which they call "alquelquella," that produce harmonies from a single string, 
by which they make sounds with all manner of subtleties whenever they 
desire and wish. 
127 
In Ptolemaic astronomy, the "motion of the entire heavens" was the 
apparent rotation of the skies around the earth every 24 hours, driven by the primum 
mobile or sphere of first motion. 
128 
Tliis appears to be the first Western reference to mantrayana, the Hindu 
religious and magical discipline centered on sacred words. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
79 
They perform similar wonders with women, whom they cause to conceive 
without intercourse with men, and they do this with motions, workings, and 
medicines. Some Hindus make a certain medicinal wine which they drink, 
and which prevents and forbids them from growing old and suffering the 
infirmities of old age, and they can only die a natural death because of the 
virtue of this wine. Implicit in these things are other, even more powerful 
things, for these things just mentioned are provided to them by nature, 
but the others are yielded up only to diligence and labor, and they have the 
greatest power to enchant and fascinate others in this world. 
Some ordinary Hindus say and assert in their discourses that the space 
south of the equinoctial line is populated by those whom they call devils. 
These beings are most subtle, because they do not generate or die, and with 
this the law concurs.I2'' The planets or celestial bodies that have these powers 
and vital forces in them are Saturn and Cauda Draconis. 
The sage mentioned above says that every form and figure of generation 
and corruption that exists in this world is disposed and ordained by the 
powers and influences of the fixed stars, and by the aspects and dispositions 
of the fixed stars that exist in their images. He says also that other figures 
and forms are in the heavens but are not found on earth, and are not known 
or understood except by the wise, who are learned in the sciences of the 
magical art and of spirits, and who conclude their work with a conclusion in 
proportion to it. To these figures and forms they give names by which they 
may be known, though these names reveal nothing of the essence or any other 
quality of the figure. These names are figures and seals such as this: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Afterwards, they connect the points together with lines. The lines that 
extend from one point to another are considered to be rays that reach from 
one to another, and figures and images are calculated from them, and these 
are placed in the eighth sphere among the fixed stars. 
The 
same sage has said that there are other imaginal figures in the heavens 
that cannot be figured except by the intellect, as the degrees of heaven are 
their embodiment. The wonders that this sage has described cannot be 
understood or known except out of the books of the Hindus, which have 
•ntroduced many to this science. They say that figures ought to be made 
in a proper and opportune hour and time and arrangement of the heavens, 
w'th a due and appropriate ascendant. They undertake similarly to perform 
1 2 9 
"The law" is a reference to the Qu'ran, a necessary bit of camouflage in a 
translation made for a Christian king. 
8o 
)t PicatriF-Jltber ftubeu * GEDtton 
divination with heads,13" or birds, as well as mirrors and swords into which 
one gazes,131 and likewise explain the interpretation of dreams. They do all 
this in order to accomplish their desires and to know subtle and secret things. 
With these things, the Hindus are able to guide themselves, just as 
astrologers guide themselves by circles formed around the planets and 
the moon, and the rainbow or celestial arc that appears in the air, and the 
apparent sparkling of the stars, and the whirlpools that appear in the sun,132 
by all of which astrologers assist themselves in judging and understanding the 
effects of the heavens. 
They have also said that in the heavens there are forms that are beautiful 
and lovely, and others that are completely lacking in beauty, which they 
form from the dispositions and aspects of the fixed stars. Those people who 
are born when the beautiful and lovely forms are rising, while the Sun and 
Moon are in similarly beautiful figures, are thus shown to be fortunate in 
their thoughts and deeds; while if an ugly and deformed figure is rising at 
the hour of birth, this shows that the person thus born will be unfortunate in 
his deeds, business, and thoughts. You ought to consider this in revolutions 
of nativities"3 and in every conjunction, and likewise in magical workings. 
Other sages have said that what is shown by the constellations is not borne 
out by any other judgment, like vain dreams that lack significance or insight. 
According to these, you are warned not to study them, and above all else you 
should not try to accomplish your desires using them. Rather, you will find 
these revealed in nativities, conjunctions, and revolutions. 
Similarly, the sages have said that obtaining knowledge from dreams is a 
certain power present in the soul, by which the soul is linked to the spirits of 
heaven. By these forms and figures are seen that correspond to the things that 
are possible on earth, and they are given form by the power of these spirits, 
and these are true dreams, by which we are given certain knowledge of things. 
The science of dreams is congruent to the science of astrology, and 
similar to it, because this science of dreams draws support from the science of 
astrology. Its power and influence come from the powers of Mercury because, 
when Mercury is strong in a natal chart, this shows the power of divination by 
dreams. Other dreams come from silence, from the state of the humors, and 
from vapors rising to the brain, as doctors say and assert, and these dreams 
mean nothing. 
130 
These are the talking brass heads of medieval legend. 
131 
Mirrors and polished sword blades were used to induce clairvoyance, much 
as crystal balls are used in more recent traditions. 
132 
Et turbine in Sole apparente in the original. It is hard not to identify these as 
sunspots, though these were supposedly first seen by Galileo in 1610. 
133 
Called "solar returns" in modern astrology, the revolution of a nativity is a 
chart cast each year when the sun is at the exact position in the heavens as it was at a 
persons birth, and predicts the events of the following year for that person. 
HBoofe 
33 Chapter 3 
81 
You should know that dreams are indeed demonstrations of pure images 
separated from physical bodies and distinct from them. This happens when 
the soul turns away from perceiving through the sensory powers and does not 
work through them. Thence dreams are formed according to the cogitations 
of the mind and the powers of informing images—those that have the 
powers of sensory things and also possess the third property, which is the 
reminiscence of things after they have been, in this way: when the rational 
spirit is complete in itself as it should be, it sees images just as the person 
himself has seen. Thus the images come in dreams, appearing as no more and 
no less than when they were seen previously. 
If the power by which the images are shown is stronger than the rational 
spirit, the dreamer will see what he has seen before in the form belonging to 
those things previously apprehended by sight, and not in the form proper 
to themselves. A man whose rational spirit is complete in itself will in a 
dream how a bear or a dog came running after him, and approached him. 
According to the other manner, the aforesaid dream will appear with a man of 
ugly appearance running after the dreamer, and this is a similitude. 
If his nature is strong and potent, the spirit will be impeded by that 
strong nature, which is stronger,"4 and it will interject natural things such as 
eating, drinking, dressing, and lying with women; and the dreamer will see 
all the things natural to the body in the dreams, but in greater abundance. If 
his body is predisposed to intercourse with women, that is, if it has an excess 
of semen, it will appear to him as though he is copulating with a woman, 
and this is because nature wishes to expel from him that surplus matter. If 
the body has an excess of moist humors, he will see streams and waters in 
his dreams. If it has an excess of choler, fires and people lighting them and 
the like will appear in his dreams. If there is an excess of melancholy, he will 
see frightening and dreadful things, and the like, in his dreams. Auguries1" 
are obtained in a similar way, and they are true when the power of the 
augur's ability to interpret them combines with the things he sees, hears, and 
comprehends while sitting, and understands from those things he perceives 
from the augury. 
If the power of those things"6 in which the images appear be stronger, 
and reflect things in a pure way, then they are held to be like the things 
the wise see in mirrors, and guide themselves by what they see and hear, 
and by all these things they are able to attain to the power of knowledge 
and understanding of the things that they experience therein. All this is 
j 3 ^ 
That is, stronger than the spirit. 
Augury is the art of divination from natural omens such as the flight of 
1 3 6 
That is, mirrors, swords, and other magical tools used for visionary 
exPerience. 
82 
Cfje Watnv"%\bev ttnbeu* Cftrition 
accomplished by the power and fortitude of the spirit. In this way it fashions 
the virtue or vigor by which images are represented when they are separated 
from things that are sensed, and leave the realm of the senses. The spirit 
becomes a medium between the things of the senses and the visible experience 
that follows when they are conjoined with the power of the spirit. From this 
process proceed dreams and auguries: that is, when the body is purged of 
bad humors and achieves a proper humoral balance, whatever is seen will be 
truthful and certain; and if the body be otherwise, then whatever is seen will 
be false and vain. 
It is manifest that divination is a virtue of the quintessence, and this is 
what we call prophecy. It is one of the powers of the spirits, in which what 
is seen is formed from separate things. It both perceives and understands 
them, whether sleeping or waking, because when the virtue of that in which 
the images are represented is complete and purified from all superfluities and 
impurities, it will see separate things just as though they were reflections in 
a mirror; in just the same way, they appear in the spirit when it is shining 
and whole. Because of this, nobody will be a diviner who can predict 
what will be from abstract considerations, nor understand things that can 
be known perfectly by the senses. If he is well versed in things of the sort 
mentioned above, which are comprehended by the senses, and lacks the other 
requirements just mentioned,"" he is simply a sage. If he has both these 
complementary powers, then he is a prophet. 
This cannot occur except in unique people in whom the prophetic spirit 
is completely established by the original dispositor of images, who is God 
himself, and who transmits this same prophetic spirit and establishes it in 
the midst of the common sense.1" Thus God himself places such a virtue in 
the prophet naturally, since from the common sense proceeds the virtue and 
power of the senses, or the human intellect. To the common sense is joined 
the powers by which images are represented, and from this, because of the 
connection with this virtue, the common sense of such a person is adorned 
with that virtue; and because he comes into contact with the virtues of the 
images that are represented, he is called a prophet. 
One who is thus disposed is higher and more complete and more 
fortunate than any other person. It is good to ask if through such a person 
we can obtain the same state, for human beings do not desire goodness unless 
by it we may obtain a better fortune. For this reason it behooves us to turn 
toward good habits and desires, that we do not become people of wicked 
137 
That is, the balanced humors and other qualities that allow the perception 
ot truthful visions. 
138 
In medieval psychology, the common sense is the part of the mind where 
the perceptions of the live senses are blended to create a single image of the world. 
Boob 33 Chapter 3 
7' 
habits. For this reason the prophets instruct people in laws and teach them 
to believe in the next world, so that the people unite themselves to goodness 
with a single mind. This is the way and the means by which that good 
fortune is achieved, along with an understanding of the things of this world 
and their qualities, and how they function together as well as individually. 
This we may call part of prophecy, which proceeds in order from sensible 
things to higher things in various directions, until we come to metaphysical 
science, in which human virtue is completed, and speculative sciences, by 
which it is perfected. It is good that man seeks this, nor can he find anything 
better, since he can seek and find nothing that is better than complete good 
fortune. 
Albunasar Alfarabi1 w said this in the book he wrote concerning service to 
rulers: the order and disposition of things in the universe can be perceived 
according to the manner and way of high and sublime things, and it is by 
means of good habits, and virtuous deeds that bring forth goodness, that we 
may attain so great a fortune. Those who have made a firm beginning in the 
quest for this are without sorrow, for they will have joy and happiness and 
lasting wisdom perpetually and without end. They will join with the founder 
of the law14" in saying that this life is not worth remembering unless there 
is another life in the world to come, because the present life, seen from the 
standpoint of that which is to come, is as nothing. 
Now, however, we return to our theme. I say that according to the 
opinion of the Hindus, spirits reveal themselves in physical forms that speak 
and show things, so as to make kings love and hate according to their will, 
and to bring forth and withdraw from effect whatever is desired. This accords 
with the work of the ancient sages, who fashioned images in diverse forms, 
and included with them the times and prayers that accord with what is 
sought. 
Again, they say that images are spirits of time, chosen because the works 
that are done with them are like miracles, and have the form of miracles. 
This is because their works are instituted by natural virtues, for natural 
virtues cause miraculous effects; thus the red jargoon stone (that is, the ruby) 
relieves and helps those who hold it against evils and infirmities, and against 
epidemics, and performs many other works by its natural virtue. Thus an 
image may be made joining two virtues, that is, the virtue and power of 
celestial bodies that the image receives from bodies that are far off, as well 
as from natural virtues impressed in them, as is done to expel fleas, frogs, 
and flies, which is done by magistery and the work of the constellations and 
•39 
Abunasar: this is Abu Nasr Muhammad al-Farabi (872-950), the great 
medieval Muslim philosopher. 
A reference to Muhammad, the prophet of Islam. 
8 4 
Cgie Ptcatrip-JLiber ttubeiw C&ition 
celestial bodies. 
Images of the hours and minutes ought to be made from materials that 
are naturally appropriate, having the effect that you desire. The property of 
natural virtue is such that you ought to understand and know out of what 
material any image ought to be made and consecrated according to the virtue 
and effect you desire. Likewise, you ought to know that all works that can be 
made to happen in this world, because of anything known or anything made 
or attained by knowledge—all this can be done with images. If you diligently 
study all that we have expounded so far, you will help yourself greatly in 
gaining perfection in this science. 
Chapter Six 
The virtues of images, and by what means they may be had, 
and how images may receive the powers of the planets, and how 
works are done by images, and this is the foundation of 
the science of magic and images 
t
ou should know that what we call virtue is jointly conferred by 
nature and spirit. If that which acts, acts according to its virtue, it 
will manifest its own nature in that action. This is especially true 
:h an action has its virtue in those things that do not manifest the 
nature that exists in them, the working will be stronger and more apparent, 
and what proceeds from it will be more true and more clearly known. This 
is like the virtue of scammony,141 which draws out the choleric humor by its 
own proper virtue, and this is because of the correspondence that choler has 
to heat and dryness, to which choler is assimilated by its nature. This appears 
likewise in simples,142 for when something is done by means of the virtue and 
similarity of nature existing in them, the results are more manifest, true, and 
apparent. 
In the same way, magical images work by virtue and similarity, because 
a magical image is nothing other than the power of celestial bodies in the 
material bodies that they influence. Thus when the substance of the material 
body is disposed to receive the influence of the aforesaid celestial bodies or 
planets, and the celestial body likewise is disposed to influence the material 
141 
Scammony: Convolvulus scammonia or Syrian bindweed, a powerful 
purgative used in medieval medicine. 
142 
Simples: in medieval medical theory, medicines made from a single herb. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
85 
body of the magical image, that image will be more powerful and more 
disposed to bring about the effect we seek and desire. Similarly, the gifts of 
the planet will be more perfect and more complete. 
Here is an example. When you wish to make and consecrate a magical 
image, consider the purpose and shape in which you wish to make the image, 
as well as the material of which you intend to make and consecrate it. Let 
the aforesaid things be in correspondence to one another, and let them reflect 
the powers and influences of the planet that rules the working. When it is 
fashioned in this way, the image will be powerful and complete, and its effects 
will follow and be manifest, and the spirit that has been placed in the magical 
image will be apparent in its effects. Those who fashion magical images but 
are ignorant of the foregoing make them badly. 
In the same way, when you want to make something animal out of 
animals, or something made of wood, or something built of stonework, you 
should first take parts of that composition, and combine them with other 
parts of the same nature. Let them then be mixed and incorporated into a 
proper mixture.1'" Work in this way until the process is completed. When 
you do this, nature will not fail to have its proper effect, and the stars similarly 
will augment and increase that effect until the desired result follows. These 
influences act in many ways, and work as well in tinctures, as in animals that 
human beings by their own efforts are able to bring to life, such as reptiles, 
serpents, scorpions, and many similar things144 that are made by composition 
and similar works, by the disposition of nature and the powers of the planets. 
Similar to these are the works that are done by the decoction and mixture 
of things, from which appropriate medicines are made from necessary and 
opportune ingredients. Another example is the decoction of semen in the 
womb, which undergoes a certain decoction until it is brought to a condition 
appropriate to receive the essence of the creature. Thus nature accomplishes 
its works, and the planets contribute their proper powers, until the process 
reaches its ordained completion. 
It is in this same way that some stones are compounded of minerals and 
water. At first, water is clear, and then the wind blows upon it, vibrating 
and striking against it until it curdles like milk. Then it is decocted into the 
nature of minerals, being already inclined to that nature, and at length after 
coction it congeals and is assimilated to the stone of a convenient mineral and 
receives the form and shape of that mineral.145 
143 
That is, combine the magically active ingredients with inert matter of 
the same general kind and mix them thoroughly, so that the whole substance 
l s permeated with the magically effective mixture. This and several following 
Paragraphs seem remarkably reminiscent of the modern theory of homeopathy. 
144 
Instructions for tnese processes are included in Book IV, chapter 9. 
145 
In medieval geology, some stones—notably quartz crystal—were thought to 
jC&e l^icatriF-iLiber Uubeiw edition 
In the same way the substance of trees is made and ordained, in all things 
that are born from the earth in such a manner. It happens in a similar way: 
first, the seed rots until it is brought to a disposition from which it is able 
to become the tree which is to be generated. It receives its form and figure 
corresponding to that which complements the tree's form; and it receives that 
form and complement out of the nourishing humidity received from that 
substance that was acquired at the time of its putrefaction. 
In this way, in fact, are all things done that are made by skillful means, 
since at first it is necessary to remove the form and shape originally existing 
in that substance. In this way are worked all magisteries which intend to 
accomplish anything and proceed to do so. First the parts of all those things 
that will be used to make the thing are gathered together, and then worked 
together until they become a composite material disposed to receive a 
different form. 
In this way we see that all works accomplished by means of fermentation 
are done, and the same thing is done by those who make cheese and butter, 
and other things composed of milk and honey; and the same thing is done 
by those who make thread with silkworms, and all other craftsmen who work 
at other crafts convert and transform one thing into another in this same 
way. This happens because any material that has a form and shape is not 
able to receive another form until it loses and surrenders the one it had at 
first; only thus a substance disposed to receive another form may then receive 
it. Once the substance receives some form and is formed thereby, it is freed 
and disencumbered from all other forms it previously had. We say this only 
concerning materials that exist here below, for in the superior world substance 
is informed with durable forms, so that they cannot be separated from their 
form; nor is any material able to take another form. 
You should understand that work with magical images is done in this 
way. The makers of images first learned how to gather together things out 
of which a magical image could be constructed, and which are disposed and 
convenient to receive that form. Thus we see the laurel branch which heals 
and overcomes the poison of adders, and we see the crocus, from which 
scorpions flee; and wasps, which flee from bitter and sharp flavors, but 
delight in and seek out rose water, and may be drawn together by the odor 
of the herb thyme. Many other things happen in the same way, such as the 
increase of sperm and virility of a man with a woman after eating chickpeas, 
and many other things that grow by working with correspondences. Thus 
the body of a magical image is composed from many things joined together. 
By this combination it takes on a serviceable form so that it can receive the 
be congealed water. Note that the form of a thing, in medieval science, comprised its 
basic material characteristics, not its outward shape. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
87 
powers and potencies of the things for which the image itself is fashioned and 
created. 
In this same way physicians work in compounding medicines, when they 
seek to heal pain and illness, for the work of healing with medicines proceeds 
in two ways. Of these, the first uses simples, and this is a good and perfect 
work in its own right, as Johannicius146 has said in his book On Physic, that 
always and in every case you will be able to help with simples, and you never 
need to work with compounded medicines. The second uses medicines 
compounded out of many things, combined by this work into one medicine. 
In this way are made electuaries and the greater theriac of Galen,147 which is 
made of many medicines. 
I tell you that a single planet has diverse effects entirely distinct from one 
another, just as fire does when it cooks honey. When this is done properly, 
with a moderate heat, the honey receives a good taste, better than it tasted 
before, while if it is cooked too much, it is strongly burnt and takes on a 
bad taste. This happens with planets when they stand in bright and dark 
degrees.14" The heavens have two effects; one is their motion and natural 
effect, and the other is their accidental heat, which is generated from motion; 
and consequently heat comes from motion, and motion from the heavens.149 
This teaching is true and manifest. But those things that appear to the 
senses are made by motion, the motion and spirit of the eighth sphere or the 
heaven of Zodiacal signs. This is because of the powers of the fixed stars, and 
therefore it truly appears that that heat follows motion, and motion follows 
the powers and fortitudes of the fixed stars. The virtue of the fixed stars is a 
first composition,15" having nothing before it in priority. 
You should understand the same thing of all the parts and movements of 
the heavens and the heat born from them. The effects of the stars accordingly 
follow the effects of the heavens in this way, because the heavens produce 
their effects by means of some particular star, and the stars do not cause their 
effects except through the heavens or from the heavens, since no star has 
motion in itself alone, but has its effects and causes wonders according to 
146 
Hunayn ibn Ishaq (809-873), known to the Latin West as Johannitius or 
Johannicius, was a famous physician and translator of Greek medical texts. 
147 
Electuaries are medicines blended with sugar or honey, while the greater 
theriac of the Roman physician Galen, believed to be a universal medicine, contained 
dozens of ingredients including viper's meat and powdered mummy. 
148 
Certain degrees in each sign of the Zodiac were considered "bright," while 
others were "dark" or "obscure." 
149 
The concept of motion in medieval physics is much more complex than 
the modern concept, and includes all forms of change. The argument being made 
jiere is that all changes in the material world are either caused directly by the stars, or 
indirectly, by heat generated by changes caused by the stars. 
150 
That is, the powers of the fixed stars do not come from anything else in the 
cosmos, since they were created directly by God. 
88 
jOje PicatnF'Jlibcr Uubcus c^Dttion 
the motion of the heavens. The first matter is the first nature, and is itself the 
source of truth, and the works of the stars proceed according to the vestments 
and colors that it makes for them. Therefore it is nobler and higher than any 
other thing.l,1 
The degrees of heaven have no properties except in their places and 
images, because there is no division in the heavens between parts that act and 
parts that do not; down to its lowest part it is entirely one in form, power, 
work, and sense, without any diversity or difference in its parts. Because it is 
all of one substance, it cannot have any diversity in its qualities over time. 
It is in no way possible for any degree of the heavens or the firmament 
to lack the quality or essence of the fixed stars, because the whole heaven of 
the fixed stars is so replete with stars. Those who say that a given degree of 
the heavens is empty of stars at a given time say this only in the sense that 
it is impossible to see or sense a star there, because only the larger stars can 
be seen, and there is no way for the others to be discerned by sight. Thus 
it can happen that a star may be in a place where it has no manifest effects, 
that is, when it is not in its term or exaltation, rising or opposite its rising, or 
standing retrograde or direct (unless it goes to one of the aforesaid places), 
nor having any assistance or aspect with some planet corresponding with its 
nature or opposed thereto, because these placements, even when they have 
effects, have effects contrary to those of the active placements of the fixed 
stars, and are similar to places having no effect, because planets never lack 
motion in the heavens and therefore never lack effects. This is why in these 
placements we say that they are very obscure and concealed. This is why you 
ought to note well and diligently consider this, so you understand effectively 
what follows from it, because when the planets are stronger in their effects, 
they function in two modes, that is, general and particular. The general effect 
is that which is not directed against any one manifested thing, while the 
particular effect is directed toward one manifested thing. According to this, 
it is said that some planet is the dispositor, or has an aspect, or collection, or 
reception, and so forth. 
Here is an example of this. When food is in the stomach and is drawn by 
the liver through the mesentery, it is changed into blood; and when it is sent 
by the liver to the other members of the body, it is made into the similitude of 
the other members, as diverse as they are. Thus in each member of the body, 
it loses its form and gives up its resemblance to blood, as though it never had 
it, and becomes bone in the bones, and likewise nerve in the nerves, and does 
likewise in the other members. 
The planets do the same thing in their motions. When they go toward 
151 
The first matter or prima materia is the quintessence, the substance out of 
which the heavens were believed to be made. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
89 
some aspect or conjunction, or any of the aforementioned places, they 
proceed to convert themselves according to the nature and operation of the 
place to which they go. Similarly, when a planet is rising, it works according 
to the operation of the star that is directly above it, and is assimilated to the 
star in its effects, and thereby works wonders. Furthermore, when it is in 
opposition to the ascendant, it works according to the planet that is below 
it.152 For this reason you ought to pay close attention and note exceedingly 
well what we say in this place. 
For we say this: that the heaven of the fixed stars works in accord with 
the operations and effects of the primum mobile, and the heaven of the Moon 
influences and acts through the works of the nature of fire and air, more 
than other natures, on account of its subtlety. Thereafter we speak of Saturn, 
because when it is rising it has the effects of the fixed stars that are above it, 
and when it is opposite the ascendant it has the effects of Jupiter. We say the 
same thing about the other planets, that is, when a planet is rising its effects 
and action will be according to the action and effects of the planet that is 
above it in the order of existence, and when it is opposite the ascendant it will 
act according to the operations of the planet that is below it in the order of 
existence. This principle is much appreciated in the art of magic. The sages 
of old concealed it with all their might, but it would be wholly improper for 
us to fail to explain it. 
You should keep firmly in mind that a planet that proceeds more slowly 
in its motion is stronger in its effects, and conversely a planet that is swifter in 
motion is weaker in action, while moderate motion yields moderate effects. 
In holding this opinion the ancient sages did not agree with the common 
teaching, because others have taught otherwise and to the contrary, saying 
that a planet slower in its motion is weaker in its effect, and swifter in motion 
is stronger in effect. The reasoning of these latter proceeds like this: they 
understand the foregoing according to the order and disposition given by the 
primum mobile to the sphere of fixed stars; while the reasoning of the others 
follows the disposition of the motion of generation on earth, according to 
which the more ponderous planets are stronger in effect and the swifter are 
weaker. 
According to the opinion which deals with the disposition of the primum 
mobile to the sphere of the fixed stars, a planet swifter in motion will have a 
stronger effect, and one slower in motion will have a weaker effect, because 
152 
"Above" and "below" here, and in the followingpanigraphs, refer to the 
Position of the planers and stars in medieval cosmology. The doctrine presented 
here—that each planet takes on the characteristics of the next higher sphere when 
•"'sing, and the next lower when setting—is not found 111 later astrological writings 
and may be unique to the Picatrix. 
9 ° 
C&e ^tcatnic-lliber Uubeua <£Dition 
it is a proportion of similars.1" In this matter the wise disagree with one 
another, for one group of ancient sages held the contrary, positing the same 
similitude but attributing it to the primum mobile and the sphere of fixed 
stars; accordingly, the more ponderous planets will be better and more 
convenient in their similitude to the primum mobile as well as the sphere of 
fixed stars in their slowness, because they are slower in motion, and thus the 
slower will be similar to the slower and the faster to the faster. About this 
many of the ancient sages spoke secretly and occultly in their books, while we 
intend to speak here of the secret of the sages of the ancient art of magic. 
You should know that when the Moon is conjunct Saturn, its effects 
will be in accord with those of Saturn. This happens because the influence 
of Saturn is stronger than the influence of the Moon, just as when any other 
planet is conjunct Saturn, their effects will be in accord with the dispositions 
and effects of Saturn. This is because the power of Saturn is the strongest of all 
the planetary forces, and this happens for the reasons and causes given above, 
that is, because of its supreme height and propinquity to the highest heavens, 
that is, the primum mobile and the sphere of the fixed stars. 
Because Saturn is very slow, its motion is assimilated to that of the 
primum mobile and the other superior qualities mentioned above. Everyone 
that speaks of Saturn's conjunctions with Jupiter, the Sun, and Venus, says 
that when these latter are joined with the influences of Saturn, they are 
changed or altered with a great change or alteration. The same influences 
flow to Jupiter from the fixed stars, and generally to all the planets, down to 
Venus and the Moon. Thereafter, the influences of the fixed stars appear in 
water and earth, and the four elements and the generations that are generated 
from them, in which the influences appear outwardly. 
When any two planets conjoin, the conjunction can have three qualities, 
that is, increase, decrease, and balance; for example, when the Moon is 
conjunct Saturn, the influence of the Moon will be weakened and lost, 
because the power of Saturn exceeds the power of the Moon, provided that 
they are joined in the same degree of longitude and latitude, in their hayz,11"1 
in their exaltations, or in some similar quality, such that the Moon and 
Saturn proceed together and are in the same place, and not otherwise. This 
relationship of Saturn with the other planets appears elsewhere. 
It could well happen that the influence of the Moon and its power are 
greater than the influence and power of Saturn. This would happen when 
the Moon is in one of the dignities mentioned above, and Saturn is in the 
1 53 
That is, the motion of the planets is similar to the corresponding changes 
on earth, and so changes in one are mirrored proportionally in the other. 
1 54 
Hayz: a condition in which a masculine, diurnal planet is above the earth 
in the daytime in a masculine sign, or a feminine, nocturnal planet is below the earth 
at night in a feminine sign. A planet in its hayz is greatly strengthened. 
Boob 93 Chapter 3 
7' 
contrary thereof. Now if the Moon is conjunct Saturn in a place contrary to 
the aforesaid dignities, then the effect of the Moon will follow the effect of 
Saturn as in the other relationships described above; and if Saturn is in one of 
the above dignities, and the Moon in a place contrary to them, the effect of 
the Moon will be greatly weakened and extinguished. If the Moon be equal 
in motion or slowness to Saturn, and in another place similar to Saturn's, then 
the power of the Moon and Saturn will be equal and similar in power; the 
more so if the Moon approaches her rising, which is the highest dignity that 
the Moon is able to have (although that dignity is not equal to the greater 
dignity of Saturn on the descendant), and if Saturn is direct. 
Yet the relationships of Saturn and Jupiter are not the same as those of 
Saturn and the Moon, for these two are always or almost always equal. This 
happens as follows: when Saturn and Jupiter are both dignified, then the 
effect of Jupiter is stronger than that of Saturn; and if Jupiter is dignified and 
Saturn is equal in motion, direct, and in its exaltation, then the effects of 
Jupiter will not be elevated above those of Saturn; but if it is the reverse, then 
the power of Saturn will be greater than that of Jupiter, and that of Jupiter 
will be weakened and in remission. 
Nor does this happen in the relationship of Saturn to Mars when these 
two are joined together; for the effects of Mars will be more manifest in 
appearance unless Saturn be much stronger in quality and disposition. But 
Venus and Mercury have dispositions and similitudes with every planet, and 
the Moon has no similitude or correspondence, because the Moon shares no 
similitudes or correspondences with any planet. This may be called the great 
foundation of magic, to be concealed from the multitude, for it is supremely 
necessary in magical work. 
You ought also to know that the effects of the planet are brought about 
by themselves; and this is because the planets are simple bodies. Those things 
that are simple are able to suffer no accident or corruption because, if simple 
bodies were to suffer corruption, they would no longer exist; but destruction 
and corruption cannot happen except to bodies composed of diverse things.1" 
You should know that the effect of the primum mobile is a perfect effect, and 
is the foundation of all the operations of the heavens, the planets, and the 
fixed stars, and this is because it is the power and fortitude that moves the 
°ther heavens. Because of this, it is said that the primum mobile is the mover 
of all things, nor does anything else move it; and to say that anything moves it 
would be to oppose truth. 
The heaven of the fixed stars, however, because its motion is most general,. 
155 
Simple bodies: the basic constituents of existence, and a basic rule of 
medieval physics was that simple bodies could not be created or destroyed; only the 
composite bodies formed of simple bodies could be taken apart and put together. 
9 2 
Cfje i^tcatriF-JLCber Kubeu* (iftrtrton 
alone follows the motion of the primum mobile; and it thus contains all the 
other spheres. And you should know that the motion of each of the heavens, 
along with the motion of the sphere and the fixed stars, is equal in every case, 
and the motion of the planets is according to the essential motion of their 
own heavens, by which they are moved, for no star has motion in its own 
right except by accident. The effects of the heavens are twofold, as we have 
said; there is the movement they have in themselves and the heat they have by 
accident. 
Since heat comes from motion and motion is natural to the heavens as 
we have said before, thence proceed all the gifts and influences of the planets, 
which are drawn into magical images, to move influences and powers and 
reduce them until they are made manifest, because in form is the similitude 
of the planetary influences, and in matter is the power to receive them. Every 
substance has a form appropriate to its nature, and every form has a substance 
likewise. An example of this is fire which, when it is small and begins to 
expand until it is great, is able to grow and expand because fire, once it exists, 
feeds on material from which it can draw forth more fire by burning, and the 
fire hidden in these things becomes apparent, thus feeding and enlarging the 
fire. 
You should know also that corruption does not enter into apparent things 
for the purpose of destroying them; it goes deep into things that are not 
apparent and corrupts them in a way that is not apparent. Because of this, 
apparent heat naturally rouses latent heat, and similarly, latent heat is roused 
by manifest heat. This is because latent heat is a disposition to the effect of 
heat, and thus generates it from itself. You ought to study the other reasons 
diligently; for you can extract the rest from this. 
Chapter Seven 
How to work dialectically in the science of magical images, and 
what part this ought to have in this science 
WX' 
'hat we have said so far has made clearly apparent the reception 
of form by matter, and the gift of planetary influence, and the 
'reception of its powers, as well as the forms of similarity and 
difference, since similarity is a source of help in the effect of magical images. 
This is because working with images requires similarity to the effects of the 
stars, and this includes the metal out of which the image is composed, in the 
time when it is made and the place in which the image is cast and prepared. 
Boob 33 Chapter 3 7' 
From all these helps, taken together and made appropriate by the proper 
similarities, proceeds the effect of the image; if there is any divergence among 
them, the image will be lacking in effect. From this, it may be seen that 
coadunation is, so to speak, the greatest foundation of those effects gained by 
the art of magic. 
In the same way, quantity is a foundation of this science, for magic 
works with the quadrivium.1''6 By its first division, quantity is divided into 
two parts, which are continuous quantity and discrete quantity. Continuous 
quantity is in turn divided into five parts, which are line, surface, body, time, 
and place, while discrete quantity is divided into two parts, which are number 
and word. 
Every one of these parts of quantity is most useful in magical work. For 
example, the line is necessary in magical images by reason of appearance 
and symbolism, which are required in images in order to relate them to 
the influence we want them to receive by similarity or dissimilarity. We 
divide the line itself in its turn in two ways, according to appearance and 
convenience, as we have said, according to what is written in the quadrivium, 
in the chapter on the straight line, where it says that a straight line connects 
two points and extends from each to the other. That saying is more perfect 
than any other saying about images, which says that a thing disposed to 
motion runs in a straight line, passing in one manner from the first point, 
where it begins, and running through others until it reaches another in the 
direction it is going. 
For this reason we say that something is going straight toward something; 
and this is when it will encounter with some other thing toward which, in 
its course, it moves and runs—for example, the points projected by the rays 
of the planets, which go straight toward a point on the surface of a body 
disposed to receive the projection of those rays. This is why what is more 
perfect in magical images comes from the gifts of the stars, from which the 
effects of magical images are sought. The projection of rays that are suited 
to enter a given metal are the basis on which an image is composed, in order 
to fill it up with the influence for which the image is made and consecrated 
by contrariety or similarity. Thus it is most clearly apparent that the line 
proceeding from a planet to the form of an image must necessarily be straight, 
in order for what is given to be integral and complete, because it must not be 
what is called an oblique line; that would indeed be weak and diminished. 
A plane is the figure that is produced by a force; and this is because a 
surface is the extension of the influence of an image in space. When it is 
'56 
Most of this chapter relates the concepts of image magic to the 
commonplaces of the quadrivium, the standard mathematics curriculum of the 
Middle Ages, which included the sciences of number, geometry, harmonics, and 
astrology. 
94 
C&e ^tcatrv-Hiber Kubett* dftrttfon 
extended, it necessarily becomes a plane, for all that is extended to the highest 
degree of subtlety is a plane.15" Thus water is changed and altered in itself 
by such influences as changes in heat, cold, light, odor, color, and the like. 
The influences from above that run along lines of infusion from planets into 
images, and that which results from images in their place, make a plane. 
Thus you ought to understand this secret and add it to your store of learning. 
Because this is the way that magical images work, the ancient sages never 
revealed this. 
Time is also necessary and appropriate in working with magical images, 
since they act according to the movement of bodies, as I will explain, and 
distinguish the effects of images from one another. Time is divided into parts 
by the influence of images, and by the time of the aspects in any given place, 
and the influence of their effects, if you wish that those effects be completed 
in a year, that is, from the parts of the declinations of the planets. This 
requires observing the time of planets in a proper and appropriate hour, and 
knowing the relationships they have with other planets that may be conjoined 
with them in the same degree, or may be in some aspect, such as opposition, 
square, trine, and the like. 
Other things that have to be included in this work, from the positions 
of the planets, are the effects, either complete or incomplete, that ought to 
be discerned according to the mode and form of the work. These include 
whether a planet is direct, in its fall, or in its exaltation; in what place its 
gifts will be found; in what place it will be cut off by the fortunes or the 
infortunes; when the planet will be in light, turbid, or dark degrees; and 
many other things that are taught by astrology. This is a supremely great 
secret in the doctrine of magic, following this manner of diversity, as they say, 
in similarity and contrariety. This is how time has to be observed, and the 
manner that will accomplish this, and that is the time we ought to observe in 
preparing the aforesaid images, in the place that we ought to prepare them, 
doing similar things by similar means in their proper time. 
Place, finally, is the last member of the aforesaid division of continuous 
quantity. The place is one in which work may be done easily, until it reaches 
the desired end in an appropriate time. The places of images, as well as their 
apparatus, whether this is hidden in air or earth or manifested, and everything 
similar (such as the places where images are constructed) and the places from 
which come the material of which the image ought to be made, all help 
arrange things and carry out the work, because all these considerations will 
influence the result and effect of the planets, and the work will be completed 
more effectually and marvelously by those who pay serious attention to 
statements worthy of belief. Amen. 
157 
A commonplace of early medieval physics. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
95 
I say to you that it may truly be said of the nature of miraculous and 
marvelous effects (and such are the effects of images) that their results are not 
similar to the effects of animals; they are rather like digging plants from the 
sands and cleaning stones, restricting plagues, floods, and clouds, changing 
winds, and other things like these, which will not be listed here because a 
prolix discourse would be inappropriate. 
Words and numbers, which are the material of discrete quantity, are 
necessary in divinations, auguries, the interpretation of dreams, speaking in 
public, and the like; and all of these, in one way or another, are part of the 
art of magic. Quantity in itself, however, is necessary in these workings and 
opportune for all those who observe the time, and this cannot be done except 
by computing the movements of the heavens. Thus, when we say "from such 
and such a time to such and such a time," it is truly clear that we state some 
number that has been computed, and this number, when it is applied to a 
certain place, is then perfect in computation. In the same way, when we say 
"this working will be done from this hour for forty-two days," this saying 
makes it clear that we wish to state some number that has been computed. 
Proportion also enters into this science in a way, because it is the form of 
an image. Its role is that it receives the virtue and power that are said to be 
put into images. To a great extent, these are brought into images by means 
of proportion and prepared figures in the place where a given quality is to be 
prepared. All this enters in by way of proportion, and other similar things of 
other qualities are brought in by a similar use of proportion. 
Quality in itself, however, is the cause of the effects of magical images, in 
that anything that is done by the effects of images ought to have a complete 
virtue and power similar to their effects, and this should be of the same 
quality as that which is put in those images to accomplish the manifestation 
of that virtue and effect for which the image was intended. This is the 
aptitude and mixture that it ought to have, impressed by the nature of 
higher things into the nature of lower things, so that the thing that has been 
composed is assimilated to the gift of the planets and to the receptivity it 
ought to have, in order to complement the effect of the petition, of which we 
have often spoken in this book. 
This is because planets participate more in one thing than in another. For 
example, a given planet corresponds to a particular city, and certain kinds of 
trees, animals, stones, and many other similar things. Thus something made 
°f a particular stone may become part of something else in order to receive 
the influence of a certain planet, or something similar to it is used to receive 
the influence of that planet, or its nature, which is formed within it, may 
have a similar effect and function in this way to receive the influence of that 
planet. That stone, or the substance out of which the image is made, ought 
2E$e ^tcatn^lLiber Kubetta Litton 
to function in the same way, in that the nature of the stone or other substance 
out of which the image is made ought to be strong and robust, so that the 
image will be strengthened inwardly until its nature attains the victory; and 
thus is manifested, and its effects extended. 
Those who have faithfully labored in this science only discovered the way 
by which they were able to arrive at it because they undersood the nature of 
stones, or of other notable things of the same quality, or of other qualities 
similar to them, so well that they learned that the nature of these things could 
be strengthened so that they overcame and bound all other natural things, as 
happens with electuaries and theriac, which by means of their proper virtue 
preserve health and overcome illness. This victory happens from the force of 
the many medicines contained in them, just as by joining medicines together 
many marvels are done, as in medicine, the great work,'38 and other natural 
works such as images, and the prevention of plagues, and the influence of 
stones on one another. The saying of the wise should always be kept in 
memory, that in all your works and effects you should observe concord and 
those things that delight in one another, and avoid discord and those things 
that have hatred for one another and whose nature resists one another. 
Chapter Eight 
The order of natural things, and how they may enter into this science 
The order that the ancient sages established among the degrees of 
nature was nothing other than the way that must be taken to know 
the order and nature of species159, and how they and all other things 
are governed. Thence they proceeded to relate species to one another until 
the use of medicines, and the effects they are able to have when they are 
joined together, were understood. 
We cannot keep under a veil of secrecy one necessary thing, that is, 
the disagreement among the ancient sages about what the most simple 
constituents of nature are, and how many there are. The majority of the 
sages, whom I believe to be most accurate, say that the simplest constituents 
of nature, the mothers and beginnings of all other things, are four in number: 
cold, moisture, heat, and dryness, which are truly called the primary and 
simple qualities. 
158 
Opus mains in Latin, a standard term for alchemy in the Middle Ages. 
1 59 
Species: in medieval philosophy, a narrowly defined type of anything, 
usually contrasted with genus, a broader category. For example, "human" is a species, 
while "animal" is a genus. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
97 
It follows then from the foregoing that all composite natures are hot, 
cold, moist, or dry. That which we call hot occurs when matter is united with 
heat, and the same thing should be understood concerning the others. It is 
clearly apparent when we say this - that is, when we speak of hot or cold -
that it is not similar to what is being said when we speak of heat or coldness 
themselves, or when we speak of the others in the same way. It then follows 
that this composite material becomes another composite which we call hot 
and dry, hot and moist, cold and dry, or cold and moist, which are composed 
of two natures. It is most obvious that this is not equal to what we have said 
about the others, that is, hot but not dry or moist, or cold but not dry or 
moist.16,1 
Third in order follow other composite natures, that is, fire, air, water, and 
earth, which are the third composite natures coadunated from the primary 
and secondary qualities. After these natures follow other composite natures 
that are arranged in a fourfold order, that is, those that are in bodies that are 
divided in many parts—for example, the four seasons of the year, which are 
winter, spring, autumn, and summer, and the four humors that are found in 
human beings as well as in all other animals, that is, blood, phlegm, choler, 
and melancholy. Yet the material of human beings is more delicate and 
subtler than the material of any other animal, in that the nature of animals is 
grosser and much more turbid than that of humans. 
The natures that are in trees and plants that grow out of the ground, such 
as oils, tinctures, seeds, roots, and the like, are third in order; and of the same 
kind are the natures that are in stones. What we have said thus far is to be 
understood well; what we have said about trees and stones is equal to what we 
have said about humans and animals in this manner, that trees in subtlety of 
nature follow after animals. There follows in order composite things made by 
art, and then those that are composed out of composites and are the ultimate 
composite; these are medicines and other things compounded in the same 
way. 
All things composed of simple and composite natures, in turn, are 
divided into seven parts, which thereafter proceed by extension into twenty-
eight parts.16' I wish to exemplify this here, so that I might make clear that 
what is divided accords with the first explanation as well as the example. 
I say, then, that the simple natures are heat, coldness, moisture and 
160 
The point the author is making here, another commonplace of medieval 
physics, is that something that is hot is not the same as pure heat, since it is composed 
of neat and the thing heated, while something that is hot and moist, for example, is a 
compound combining the substance, the heat, and the moisture. 
161 
This is a subtle piece of Pythagorean numerology. There are seven 
astrological planets, and 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 is 28, the number of mansions of 
the Moon. The author's central point is that all things are governed by a planet and a 
lunar mansion. 
98 
E&e ¥>icatriF"3Liber Kubeuff CDition 
dryness; the first composite natures are hot, cold, moist, and dry; the second 
composite natures are hot and dry, hot and moist, cold and dry, and cold and 
moist; the third composite natures are the elements themselves, that is, fire, 
air, water, and earth; the fourth composite natures are the seasons of the year, 
that is, spring, winter, summer, and autumn; the fifth composite natures are 
the four humors, that is, blood, choler, phlegm, and melancholy; and the 
sixth composite natures are tincture, oil, roots, and seeds; and so on. 
For this reason I say that heat, cold, moisture, and dryness are similar to 
fire, air, water, and earth, when they are divided into many parts by sense and 
perception. Therefore it is said that fire is hot, since it is hot and dry, but it is 
not said of heat itself that it is fire, nor that it is compounded of fire or some 
other thing, because every composite thing is joined to the thing that precedes 
it and is named after that of which it is composed, as heat precedes fire, 
moisture water, coldness water, and dryness earth. Yet this manner of speech, 
along with the example, we have used in the foregoing; and this same manner 
is used in speaking about the liver, lungs, gall, heart, head, thighs, hands, and 
all other members of the body. 
Heat, as we have already said, is caused by the motion of the heavens; 
coldness is generated out of the center thereof (for the earth is called the 
center of the primum mobile), out of which terrestrial substances produce 
all generations in all substances; and coldness thus opposes heat in all its 
necessary qualities, in rest and motion, because heat is a quality that joins 
similars and divides contraries. In the same way, we say that by cold, 
contraries are joined and similars are divided. Thus all the qualities of these 
two ought to be opposed, because if this distinction between them was not of 
this nature, it would be harmed and destroyed. 
Therefore I say to you that, if you wish to work in these high, noble, and 
intellectually profound sciences, you must not be sparing in zeal, or sluggish 
in studying the sayings and the books of the sages, because by their means 
you may attain what you desire. The other things that we have said up to this 
point, in mixing and combining things together, extracted from the sayings 
of the sages as well as all the sciences, we have said only by way of explanation 
and arrangement for your spirit and intellect, so that you might be made 
benevolent, teachable, and attentive in these things. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
99 
Chapter Nine 
Examples of the figures and forms of images that call down the 
assistance of the planets 
ow we shall return to the discussion we began earlier, when we were 
j 
[^/.speaking of the figures of the heavens and their effects and how to 
j^^call down the assistance and influence of the stars. I say that the 
six images, which will be discussed principally below, have virtue, power and 
effects on the world. In this place I intend to discuss and name these figures, 
that is, what can be expected of their action and effects, according to the 
ancient sages who have labored at this work and are in agreement with one 
another. 
The first of them is to chase away mice from whichever place you 
wish. Write the following figures on a plate of red copper, with the first face 
of Leo rising, for this figure belongs to the fixed stars that are in the sign of 
Leo. When it is made, place this plate in the place of the mice, and all of 
them will flee from this place and run away. This is the figure: 
V
X 
A 
To be rid of gnats. Make the following figures in a sulfurous stone with 
the second face ofTaurus rising and place this stone in the place where you 
wish. No gnats will ever be able to come to that place as long as the stone 
stands. This is the figure: 
y 
* 
r
a
z
* 
t 
» 
f 
«, 
1 
« 
To chase away flies from whatever place you wish. Draw these figures 
on a tin plate with the third face of Scorpio rising, and place the plate in 
whatever place you wish. Flies will keep away from this place. Here are the 
figures of the stars which drive them away: 
ioo 
Cljc PicamF-Hlfljetr KHUCUB CBDition 
For any man which you wish to quickly come to you or to any place 
you wish. Make these figures in linen cloth, in the day and hour of Venus, 
with Venus rising in the second face ofTaurus, and in that hour write the 
name of he whom you wish to come. Then set the top of the linen cloth on 
fire. At once he whom you said will come. Here is the figure: 
V W -tff 
To cause hostility. When you wish to separate two men so that they will 
no longer please each other, draw the figures written below with the tooth 
of a black dog on a plate of black lead in the day and hour of Saturn, with 
Saturn rising in the third face of Capricorn; put the plate in the place of one 
or the other or in the place where they come together. It will dissolve their 
friendship and they will never again please each other. Here is the figure: 
p
i
j 
m 
To make whatever place you wish unfortunate, so that no one dwells 
there. Make these figures on a lead plate with the brain of a pig in the day 
and hour of Saturn, with Saturn rising in the second face of Capricorn, and 
put the plate in the place you wish to destroy. And the evil power of Saturn 
will pour into it, and no one will dwell there as long as the plate remains 
there. Here is the figure: 
/ V I 
( 
All of the six preceding works are done through the power of the planet 
or planets when they are bodily conjoined to the aforesaid constellations. You 
should know that there are no figures that call down the help of the fixed 
stars except these six,11^ nor have the sages written them down in many places 
For this reason we have chosen to write down this science completely in this 
book. 
162 
A statement oddly at variance with the rest of the chapter, which defines 
these as figures that call down energies from the planet. 
Boob 33 Chapter 10 
,01 
Chapter Ten 
The stones proper to each planet and the formation of figures 
/ ^ f n this part I intend to reveal how each planet corresponds to metals and 
A stones, and to the figures of the planets and their marvelous operations. 
The first is Saturn. Of the metals Saturn has iron and part of gold, 
his stones are diamond, onyx, cameo, and azebehe that is black and clear, 
and iron ore and magnesia and ruby in part, and yellow marcasite, and also 
hematite. 
Of the metals, Jupiter has lead, and precious stones that are white and 
golden and part of carnelian and emerald and quartz and crystal and all stones 
that are white and clear and shining, and also gold. 
Of the metals, Mars has red copper and all kinds of sulfur and has part of 
glass and premonada, and bloodstone and part of carnelian and onyx and in 
all stones that are red and tawny or speckled. 
Of the metals, the Sun has Egyptian glass and azernec'w and the stones 
albezedi and diamond and red pearls and stones that are sparkling and clear 
and part of hematite and azumbedich and ruby and the balassus ruby and 
gold marcasite. 
Of the metals, Venus has ruby and part of silver and glass and blue stones 
and coral and malachite and has part of quartz and lodestone. 
Of the metals, Mercury has quicksilver and part of tin and glass, and of 
stones it has emerald and all stones of this type and has part of azumbedich. 
The Moon of the metals has silver and silver marcasite and seed pearls 
and has part of crystal and blue stones and onyx and quartz. 
Here are the figures of the seven planets. 
H
W
H
i
A
J 
These are the figures of the planets as we have found them translated in 
the Lapidary of Hermes and in the book of Beylus and in the Book of Spirits 
and Images which was translated by Picatrix the sage.""1 
The image of Saturn according to the opinion of the sage Picatrix is the 
form of a man with the face of a crow and the feet of a camel, sitting on a 
throne. In his right hand he has a spear and in his left hand a lance or dart. 
163 
Azernec: cupric oxide, CuO. 
164 
Note that Picatrix here is no longer the name of the compiler of the book, 
hut that of one of his sources. 
102 
C&e yHcatrtjC'JLCber Unbent coition 
The image of Saturn according to the opinion of the sage Beylus is the 
image of an old man sitting erect on a throne. 
The image of Saturn according to the opinion of Hermes is the image of 
a man standing with his hands raised above his head holding a fish and under 
his feet a lagarii (that is, a lizard). 
The image of Saturn according to the opinion of other wise men is the 
form of a man standing on a dragon. In his right hand he has a scythe and in 
his left hand he has a spear, and he is wearing black garments. 
The ring of Saturn. Saturn rules the turquoise among stones and lead 
among metals. Let turquoise be engraved on the day and hour of Saturn, 
when the Moon is in Capricorn, the figure of an upright man seated on a 
dragon with a sword in his right hand and a stone similar to an egg in his 
left, and set this as a signet in a ring of lead. Let whoever carries this ring 
beware of eating the flesh of ducks and of entering any shadowy place. He 
will be served by the spirits that work in shadows and darkness, and profound 
secrets will be revealed to him, and he will be served by bulls, men, scorpions, 
serpents, and mice, and every creeping thing upon the Earth. 
The image of Jupiter according to the opinion of Beylus is the form of 
a man sitting on an eagle and wrapped in a cloak, and his feet are above the 
loins of the eagle, and his head, which is covered by the cloak, is held in his 
right hand. 
The image of Jupiter according to Picatrix is the form of a man with the 
face of a lion and feet of a bird, and under his feet is a seven headed dragon 
and in his right hand he has a dart as though he wished to throw it at one of 
the dragon's heads. 
The image of Jupiter according to the opinion of Hermes is the form of a 
man completely covered in a linen garment, riding a dragon, and with a lance 
or dart in his hand. 
The image of Jupiter according to other sages is the image of a man riding 
on an eagle, carrying cloth in his right hand and holding nuts in his left hand, 
and all of his clothing is saffron colored. 
The ring of Jupiter. Jupiter rules tin among metals and chalcedony 
among stones. If chalcedony is engraved on the day and hour of Jupiter, 
when the Moon is in Sagittarius, with the figure of a man sitting on an eagle 
with festive or exalted garments, and holding a javelin in his right hand, and 
this is set in a ring of tin, whoever caries this ring will be served by the sons of 
men, eagles, vultures, lions, and all the works of Jupiter. 
The image of Mars according to the opinion of the sage Beylus is the 
form of a crowned man with an inscribed sword in his right hand. 
The image of Mars according to the opinion of Hermes is the form of a 
nude man standing erect on his feet and before him on the right is a beautiful 
Boob 33 Chapter 3 7' 
maiden standing on her feet, which is the form of Venus; and her hair is 
fastened in the back; and Mars is placing his right hand on her neck and his 
left hand is stretched out above her breast, and he is facing her and gazing 
upon her. The sages say that this figure has great powers and very great effects, 
and with God's help we will discuss it later on. 
The image of Mars according to other sages is the form of a man riding 
on a lion with a sword in his right hand, carrying the head of a man in his left 
hand, and his clothing is a coat of iron mail. 
The ring of Mars. Mars rules iron among stones. If iron is engraved 
with a man wearing armor that covers his arms, with one sword sheathed at 
his belt and another bare sword in his right hand, and in his left the head of 
a man, and if it is engraved in the day and hour of Mars, whoever carries it 
will subdue warriors and triumph over them, and will be served by elephants, 
lions, and vultures, and all the workings of Mars will assist him. 
The image of the Sun according to the opinion of the sage Beylus is the 
image of a woman standing on her feet in a chariot drawn by four horses, 
with a mirror in her right hand, while her left hand holds a stick above her 
breast, and above her head she has the similitude of flames. 
The image of the Sun according to the opinion of Hermes is the form 
of a man standing on his feet, as though he wished to salute those he sees; in 
his left hand he is holding a round shield, and under his feet is the image of a 
dragon. 
The image of the Sun according to the opinion of Picatrix is the image of 
a king sitting on a throne with a crown on his head, and having the image of 
a crow before him, and under his feet is the figure of the Sun written above. 
The image of the Sun according to the opinion of other sages is the image 
of a baron standing erect in a chariot drawn by four horses; in his right hand 
is a mirror and in his left hand a shield, and his clothing is saffron colored. 
The ring of the Sun. The Sun rules gold and diamond among stones. If 
a diamond is engraved with the figure of the Sun driving a chariot drawn by 
four horses, holding in his right hand a marcha (this is its Arabic name), that 
is, a mirror or a bladder, and in his left hand a rod with knotted cords, and 
over his head is a rooster's crest, on the day of the Sun, the first hour of the 
day, when the Moon is in Aries, and it is set in a ring of gold, and whoever 
carries it does not eat white dove or lie with a white woman, while he had 
the aforesaid ring, he will be served by the sons of men and by nobles, and 
whatever you say will be received with reverence, and you will be helped in all 
the works of the Sun. 
The image ofVenus according to the sage Beylus is the image of a woman 
standing on her feet, and in her right hand she holds an apple. 
The image ofVenus according to the opinion of the sage Picatrix is the 
JEfje WattirHibtt Kubetw COttfon 
image of a woman holding an apple in her right hand and a comb in her left 
hand, like a tablet, with these figures written on it: OAOIOA. 
The image ofVenus according to the opinion of the sage Hermes is an 
image with the body and face of a man, the head of a bird, and the feet of an 
eagle. 
The form ofVenus according to the opinion of Ptolemy is the image of a 
nude woman with a chain around her neck held by the image of Mars, who 
stands before her. 
The form ofVenus according to the opinion of other sages is the form of 
a woman with her hair spread, riding on a stag; in her right hand is an apple 
and in her left hand flowers, and her clothing is colored white. 
The ring ofVenus. She rules bronze and copper among stones. If a 
whetstone is carved with a woman standing upright, holding a comb in her 
right hand, on the day and hour ofVenus when the Moon is in Libra, and 
set in a ring of red bronze, and whoever carries it refrains from lying with 
old women, he will be served by women and kings, and all flying and forest 
animals, chickens, locusts, and every flying thing having beautiful feathers, 
and all the works ofVenus. 
The image of Mercury according to the opinion of the sage Beylus is the 
image of a young man with a beard, holding a dart in his hand. 
The image of Mercury according to the opinion of the sage Hermes is the 
image of a man with a rooster on his head, sitting on a throne; his feet look 
like those of an eagle and in the palm of his left hand he has fire and under 
his feet are the signs stated before. 
The image of Mercury according to the opinion of Picatrix is the image 
of a man standing erect, having wings that extend to his right side and a small 
chicken on his left side, holding a dart in his right hand, and in his left hand a 
round seashell; on the middle of his head is the crest of a rooster. 
The image of Mercury according to the opinion of other sages is the form 
of a crowned nobleman riding on a peacock, with a reed pen in his right 
hand and a book in his left, and his clothing is of many mixed colors. 
The ring of Mercury. He rules over quicksilver among metals and 
lodestone among stones. If a lodestone is engraved with a man sitting in 
a throne, having a dish with a book in his presence, and at his feet people 
are sitting and students listening, on the day and hour of Mercury, with 
the Moon in Virgo, and the one who wears it does not eat fishes, he will 
understand deep things and contemplated exalted things, and he will be 
served by rivers and seas, and all that exists in them, and all the works of 
Mercury and all peoples. 
The image of the Moon according to the opinion of Mercury is the form 
of a woman with a beautiful face, with a dragon about her waist, having horns 
Boob 107 Chapter 3 7' 
on her head with two snakes encircling them, and with two more snakes 
above her head and a snake entwined around each of her arms, and a dragon 
above her head and another dragon under her feet, and both these dragons 
have seven heads. 
The image of the Moon according to the opinion of Beylus is the image 
of a woman standing on top of two bulls, with the head of one next to the tail 
of the other. 
The image of the Moon according to the opinion of Picatrix is the form 
of a man who has the head of a bird, and he holds a stick above him, and he 
has a tree before him. 
The image of the Moon according to the opinion of other sages is the 
form of a young man wearing a crown and standing upright in a chariot 
drawn by four horses; in his right hand is a crook and in his left hand a 
mirror, and all of his garments are green and white."'5 
Each one of the figures described above, whether of the Sun or the other 
planets, have miraculous powers and effects in magical operations, which we 
will explain in this book, God willing. 
Here are the images as the ancient sages, the founders of this science, put 
them down in their books. Each one of these images has miraculous effects 
and great power. Now I intend to speak of their effects and powers. 
An image of Saturn for much drinking. If under the influence of 
Saturn, you engrave in the stone feyrizechIM' the form of a man elevated in a 
high throne, on his head a yellow linen cloth, having in his hand a sickle, in 
the hour of Saturn, when he is on the Ascendant, the virtue of this image is 
that whoever carries it on his person will be able to drink heavily and die only 
of old age. 
If you wish to cause discord between any two people, make under 
the influence of Saturn these figures in his hour and when he is rising, in 
diamond. Make a seal from this talisman in pitch and put the seal in the place 
of the two friends or the place of one or the other, and they will hate each 
other. Be careful not to carry this image yourself. 
DC x 
r 
x 
x 
The Image of Jupiter. Under the influence of Jupiter, make the figure 
of a crowned man sitting on a throne with four feet carried by four winged 
165 
No ring of the Moon is given in any of the manuscripts of Picatrix. 
166 
Renaissance sources translate this word as "sapphire," hut some modern 
sources translate it as "turquoise." 
C&e ^leattfr-iliber Itttibeu* CBDttion 
men and the man who is sitting on the throne is raising his hands as though 
he were praying. Make it in the hour of Jupiter when Jupiter is rising in his 
exaltation and make it in a clear and white stone. Those who carry this image 
will have increase of riches and honor and lead a good life, and have many 
sons, and be able to perform good things and not be injured by enemies. 
If you wish to be esteemed by officials and judges, make under the 
influence of Jupiter the form of a handsome man with ample robes riding an 
eagle in crystal stone in the hour of Jupiter when Jupiter is in the ascendant 
and in his exaltation. It is true that officials and judges will esteem those that 
carry these images with them. 
If you wish to stop women from conceiving and catch as many birds as 
you desire, make under the influence of Jupiter, the image of a vulture in 
the hour of Jupiter, Jupiter rising in the first face of Sagittarius, in the stone 
called"'7. ..which is easily prepared. And if you carry this stone while hunting 
birds, birds will congregate around and you can capture as many as you wish. 
You will also be loved by men and received well by them. The stone we speak 
of is red in color, and when you shake the stone in your hand it makes a 
sound, and when polished, white water comes from it. If a woman has this 
stone she will not conceive as long as she has it. 
Hermes says that if you make the image of a fox in this stone in the day 
and hour ofVenus with Jupiter rising in Pisces aspecting the Moon, whoever 
holds this talisman will be feared by men and devils. 
If you make from this stone the image of a crane in the hour of Jupiter, 
with Jupiter exalted, and if you wash the image in liquid and drink it, you 
will see spirits, and by it whatever you wish will be accomplished. It has these 
two powers, says Hermes. 
An image of Mars to make what you wish for good or evil. Make 
under the influence of Mars the form of a man riding a lion, in his right hand 
carrying a bare sword, and in his left bearing the head of a man. Do this in 
the hour of Mars, with the second face of Aries ascending and Mars rising, 
and make the image of diamond. Whoever carries this stone will be powerful 
in good and evil, but more powerful in evil. 
If you wish your appearance to cause dread and terror, under the 
influence of Mars make an image of a man standing wearing a coat of mail 
with two swords, one lying above his neck and the other bare in his right 
hand, on his left the head of a man. Do this in the hour of Mars when he is 
in his sign, in any of the stones of Mars, and anyone who carries this stone 
will cause fear in everyone and no one will approach them. 
To stop blood from flowing from whatever part of the body you wish, 
make under the influence o f Mars, the form of a lion and before it the 
figures 
167 
The name for the stone is not given in the text. 
Boob 109 Chapter 3 7' 
or signs below. Do this in the hour of Mars, with the second face of Scorpio 
ascending, and make it as described above, in onyx. If someone carries this 
image, the flow of blood out of any part of their body will immediately be 
stopped. 
3IM 
An image of the Sun. If you wish a king or kings to overcome and 
conquer everyone make an image of the Sun in the form of a king sitting on 
a throne with a crown on his head and a crow before him and under his feet 
these figures in ruby or oriental ruby, (balassus) when the Sun is exalted. The 
king who carries this stone will conquer all other kings and his opponents. 
bofo 
If you wish not to be conquered and to complete what you begin, and to 
be protected from false dreams, make under the influence of Sun the form of 
a lion, and above it the four figures already spoken of, with the Sun rising in 
Leo and the malefics cadent and not aspecting the Sun, in a red stone. And 
whomever carries this stone will not be conquered by anyone and what they 
begin will proceed completely to the end, as we have said. 
If, under the influence of the Sun, you make the image of a woman 
sitting in a chariot drawn by four horses, holding in her right hand a mirror 
and in her left hand a scepter with a seven branched candelabra over her head, 
in a diamond when the Sun is in his exaltation, whoever carries this image 
will seem good to everyone and not be afraid. 
If, under the influence of the Sun, you write the figures below in a 
sedina'68 stone with the Sun rising in the first face of Leo, whoever carries 
this stone will be protected against the lunar illnesses that come from the 
combustion of the Moon. 
I < 5 H 3 0 0 
Image ofVenus. If, under the influence ofVenus, you make the image 
of a woman whose body is human with the head of a bird and the feet of an 
eagle, in her right hand an apple and in her left hand a wooden comb, and 
write OAOIOA on the figure, everyone who carries this image with them will 
receive good and be liked by everyone. 
768 
According to Cornelius Agrippa, this should be a cornelian stone. 
io8 
jEUt/e ^tcatri^lltber 
Hubeiw 
CDition 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make the form of a woman, holding 
an apple in her right hand and a comb in her left hand, in white stone, the 
first face of Libra ascending, whoever has or carries the above image will 
always laugh and be cheerful. 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make the image of a serpent, and 
above this the image of a spider in a crystal stone or beryl, with Jupiter 
exalted, whoever carries this stone will not be bitten by snakes, and whoever 
drinks liquid in which it has been washed will immediately be free from 
attack. 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you write the figures below in the hour 
ofVenus (in another book I found the second set of figures; you can write 
whichever ones you wish), all the boys will love you and follow you. 
D
O
X
i
^ 
DC X 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make the image of a seated woman 
with wings with her hair braided behind her back with two braids with two 
boys in her lap, in the hour ofVenus, when she is exalted, in quartz, he who 
carries this stone will not suffer loss or injury. 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make an image of three people 
holding each other, in the hour ofVenus, in a crystal, and whoever carries this 
image will be fortunate and gain profit from merchandise. 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make the image of two mousetraps 
and one mouse in the hour ofVenus, with Venus rising, in coral stone, 
wherever you put the aforesaid image no mice will remain. 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make the image of a fly flying in the 
hour ofVenus, with Venus rising, in granite, awhere the image is no flies will 
remain. 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make the image of a leech in jasper, 
and put on another part of the stone two leeches and make the head of one at 
the tail of the other, in the hour ofVenus with Venus rising, and make a wax 
seal with this image or even another seal if you wish, and throw it down in 
the place where there are leeches, none will remain in that place. 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make the image of a woman 
Boob 111 Chapter 3 7' 
standing, in a crystal stone, and before her is the image of an idol that is also 
standing, and you do this in the hour ofVenus, with Venus rising, whoever 
carries this image will be loved by women. 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make an image of a woman 
standing on her feet, looking as though she has fur on her thighs, and a 
folded paper in her hand and in her other hand she has an apple; make this in 
the hour ofVenus, with Venus rising, in granite, and if you make a seal from 
this image in wax and put it in the food of children, they will be freed from 
boils. 
If, under the influence ofVenus, you make in granite the image of the 
head of a zebra, and above it the head of a fly, and make the head of the fly a 
little smaller, that is, so it is a little smaller than the head of the zebra; do this 
in the hour ofVenus, with Venus rising, and if you make a wax seal with this 
image it is good for all infirmities of the stomach. 
An image of Mercury. If, under the influence of Mercury, you make the 
image of a baron seated on a chair with the head of a rooster and the feet of 
an eagle, and in his left hand fire and under his feet are the signs below; do 
this in the hour of Mercury, with Mercury exalted and rising, in emerald, and 
if this stone is carried into a prison it liberates prisoners. 
7KU7KJ] 
If, under the influence of Mercury, when he rises, you make this sign in 
his hour in emerald, when you carry this stone you will be served by scribes 
and notaries and all those who are the nature of Mercury. 
V L A J \ 
If, under the influence of Mercury, you make the figure of a single frog 
on the hour of Mercury, with Mercury rising, in an emerald stone, whoever 
carries it will offend no one. To the contrary, everyone you meet will speak 
well of you and say good things about your works. 
If, under the influence of Mercury, you make the image of a lion in 
emerald or another image is the image of head of a lion, in the hour of 
Mercury, Mercury rising in Gemini, and above the head write a "A" and 
below the head a "D," whoever has this image will evade infirmities and fear, 
and good things will be said of them. 
no 
C&e ^icatrir-ILfljer Uubeu* edition 
If, under the influence of Mercury, you make the image of a scorpion in 
emerald in his hour and with Mercury rising, if a pregnant women carries this 
image she will give birth easily and without danger. 
For the operations of Mercury make the image of a man holding a 
balance in the hour of Mercury, Mercury rising in marble, if you make a seal 
in wax or other similar seal you will be delivered from infirmities and quickly 
freed from fevers and this has been tested against fever. 
An image of the Moon. If, under the influence of the Moon, you make 
the form of a man with the head of a bird holding a staff above him, and 
holding the image of a branch in bloom in his hand, and do this in the hour 
of the Moon with the Moon rising in her exaltation, whoever carries this 
image on a journey will not be tired no matter where they go. 
If, under the influence of the Moon, you make this sign in lapis lazuli in 
the hour of the Moon and the Moon rising, if this image is washed in liquid 
and given to two men to drink they will love each other very much and it will 
not be possible to separate them. 
& T V " 
If, under the influence of the Moon, you make the image of a woman 
with wild hair pulled back, standing above two bulls, one with its head above 
the feet of the other and the other with its feet above the head of the other; 
fashion this in crystal, and on the other part of the stone face make the figure 
of a woman raised up with a crown, and with a staff in her right hand a staff, 
and write in a circle the sign below. Make this in the hour of the Moon with 
the Moon rising, and if you make a wax seal with this image and place it in a 
pigeon coop, many pigeons will congregate there. 
VdTV 
If, under the influence of the Moon, you make the image of a man with 
the head of a lion and on his back is this sign; 
a 
Boob 33 C&apter 10 
in 
Do this in the hour of the Moon, with the Moon rising, in lapis lazuli, 
and this image will free children from all illnesses that arise. 
If, under the influence of the Moon, you make the image of a snake, and 
above his head place the signs below in the hour of the Moon, Moon rising, 
in the bezoar stone or in green jasper, in whatever place this image is put, 
snakes and serpents will leave. 
0 1 
If, under the influence of the Moon, you make this sign in the hour of 
the Moon, with the Moon rising, in emerald, with this stone make a seal in 
incense and give it to a man for good memory, and to retain knowledge. 
^ 
O i 
These are the images proper to each of the planets. 
The first is Saturn. Make in the hour of Saturn, Saturn rising in the 
third face of Aquarius, an image in stone for healing the sadness of maidens, 
and for retaining blood or the menses of women. 
Of Jupiter. Make in the hour of Jupiter, Jupiter rising in the second face 
of Sagittarius and aspecting the Sun an image for the stopping it from raining 
excessively and to divert condemnation. 
Of Mars. In the hour of Mars, Mars rising in the first face of Scorpio, 
make an image for strengthening timidity and humbling the anger of a king 
and to turn aside robbers, wolves, wild beasts and all evil doers. 
Of the Sun. In the hour of the Sun, to take away bad thoughts and to 
heal infirmities of the stomach, make an image with the Sun rising in the 
first face of Leo and this image is strong and is said and quickly heals the 
infirmities of the elderly. 
OfVenus. In the hour ofVenus, Venus rising in the first face of Pisces, 
make an image to heal women from infirmities of the genitals and to gladden 
the sadness of men, and cure melancholy, and to take away bad thoughts and 
to have vigor and strengthen in sex, and in the first face ofTaurus are made 
images to powerfully and miraculously bring about love and to have the good 
will of men. 
Of Mercury. In the hour of Mercury, Mercury rising in the first face of 
112 
C&e PicatrtF-Elfljer ftiibeua C&Ditlon 
Gemini make images to sharpen the memory and intellect in knowledge and 
wisdom and to acquire grace from men. 
Of the Moon. In the hour of the Moon, the Moon rising in the first face 
of Cancer make images for crops and trees and everything grown in the earth 
to thrive. 
Chapter Eleven 
The images of the faces of the signs and their effects 
y ^ l P ^ h e ancient sages who have spoken of this science have said so many 
i | I 
things and offered so many reasonings, that if we wished to recount 
^Vfla^^all of it, it would be too long and diffuse, and we would stray 
from our topic. Yet we will speak of those reasonings that are necessary and 
without which we cannot pursue our topic. I will teach you, who intend 
to study this science, that you should study it, as you proceed, with a desire 
to help yourself by it, and you should reveal it to no one. The wise did not 
possess the science of the spirit, nor did they attain it, without great difficulty, 
study and labor; and they attained it because they were able to take up a 
life far removed from the concerns and cares of the world, and studied it 
with continual study with the good intelligence and memory they had. By 
good intellect and memory, the spirit and senses are fortified, and profound 
sciences are understood, through which man has a better ability to discern 
and verify those things that cannot be attained by everyone. 
To discern the truth happens and occurs through a good memory and 
intellect; for this reason the wise have said things that seem to be a kind of 
superstition, because the clarity of their teaching is all in the clarity of the 
rational spirit and the gift of the strengthening virtue of things. The clarity of 
the rational spirit is its agility and disposition to receive those things it seeks 
to receive, and from which gains speed in its quest. This is how the intellect 
becomes vigorous, active, and strong, and disbelief in the work becomes weak. 
An example of strength and weakness of this kind is this, that strength quickly 
does what is to be done without great labor, and weakness is changed quickly 
and easily, and thus one who has a good intellect and memory understands 
sciences quickly and in a short time learns what is to be understood by the 
natural senses and study and intuition concerning things. 
Good learning and understanding take place in this way, by the keenness 
of the spirit, until in a short time one obtains what he seeks. This intelligence 
and agility or disposition, however, are extracted from the acuity of fire, 
Boob 33 Chapter 3 7' 
which works quickly in its effects, and also from the keenness of the Sun, 
which separates the particles of air, and illuminates and clarifies in its hour. 
The keenness of the intellect is the same, which by its keenness and clarity 
separates what is sought, and inquires in all its parts until it achieves certainty 
and quickly understands things as they are. In the same way, the keener 
the intellect, the more and more swiftly it understands what it seeks, and 
whatever is presented to it. All of this must be understood in this place. 
Note that each of the twelve signs is divided into three equal parts, and 
these divisions are called faces. Each of these faces has its own images, forms 
and figures, as the sages of India have recounted, and to each of the faces is 
assigned one of the seven planets. These faces are divided and distributed 
according to the position and order of the planets, beginning at the highest 
and proceeding in order all the way to the lowest, and then returning to the 
highest as we will explain. Beginning with Aries, the first face is assigned to 
Mars, the second to the Sun which follows him in order, the third to Venus 
who follows the Sun, and the first face ofTaurus to Mercury; it proceeds in 
this way through the order of the planets until the end of the signs. Each 
of these faces has a nature and image that is appropriate to its lord; and we 
will present each of the images that arise in each of the faces in the following 
pages. 
The first face of Aries is Mars, and there rises in it according to the 
opinion of the great sages in this science, the image of a black man, with a 
large and restless body, having red eyes and with an axe in his hand, girded in 
white cloth, and there is a great value in this face. This is a face of strength, 
high rank and wealth without shame. This is its form. 
There ascends in the second face of Aries a woman dressed in green 
clothes, lacking one leg. This is a face of high rank, nobility, wealth and 
rulership. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Aries, a restless man, holding in his hands 
a gold bracelet, wearing red clothing, who wishes to do good, but is not able 
to do it. This is a face of subtlety and subtle mastery and new things and 
instruments and similar things. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face ofTaurus a woman with curly hair, who has 
one son wearing clothing looking like flame, and she is wearing garments of 
the same sort. This is a face of plowing and working on the land, of sciences, 
geometry, sowing and building. This is its form. 
There rises in the second face ofTaurus a man with a body like a camel, 
who has cow's hooves on his fingers, and he is completely covered by a torn 
linen cloth. He desires to work the land, sow and build. This is a face of 
nobility, power, and rewarding the people. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face ofTaurus a man of reddish complexion with 
" 4 
C&e PicatriF-JLiber Kubeu* Cftrition 
large white teeth exposed outside of his mouth, and a body like an elephant 
with long legs; and there ascends along with him one horse, one dog, and one 
calf. This is a face of sloth, poverty, misery, and dread. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face of Gemini a beautiful woman, a mistress of 
stitching, and with her ascend two calves and two horses. This is a face of 
writing, computation and number, of giving and taking, and of the sciences. 
This is its form. 
There rises in the second face of Gemini a man whose face is like an eagle 
and his head is covered by linen cloth; he is clothed and protected by a coat 
of leaden mail, and on his head is an iron helmet above which is a silk crown, 
and in his hand he has a bow and arrows. This is a face of oppression, evils 
and subtlety. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Gemini a man clothed in mail, with a bow, 
arrows and quiver. This is a face of audacity, honesty, division of labor, and 
consolation. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face of Cancer a man whose fingers and head 
are distorted and slanted, and his body is similar to a horse's body; his feet 
are white, and he has fig leaves on his body. This is a face of instruction, 
knowledge, love, subtlety and mastery. This is its form. 
There rises in the second face of Cancer a woman with a beautiful face, 
and on her head she has a crown of green myrtle, and in her hand is a stem of 
the plant called water lily, and she is singing songs of love and joy. This is a 
face of games, wealth, joy and abundance. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Cancer a celhafe with a snake in his hand, 
who has golden chains before him. This is a face of running, riding, and 
acquisition by means of war, lawsuits, and conflict. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face of Leo a man wearing dirty clothes, and there 
rises with him the image of a rider looking to the north, and his body looks 
like the body of a bear and the body of a dog. This is a face of strength, 
generosity and victory. This is its form. 
There rises in the second face of Leo a man who wears a crown of white 
myrtle on his head, and he has a bow in his hand. This is a face of beauty, 
riding, and the ascension of a man who is ignorant and base, and this is a face 
of war and naked swords. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Leo a man who is old and black and ugly, 
with fruit and meat in his mouth and holding a copper jug in his hand. This 
is a face of love and delight and food trays and health. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face of Virgo a young girl covered with an old 
woolen cloth, and in her hand is a pomegranate. This is a face of sowing, 
plowing, the germination of plants, of gathering grapes, and of good living. 
This is its form. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
5 
There rises in the second face of Virgo a man of beautiful color, dressed 
in leather, and over his garment of leather is another garment of iron. This is 
a face of petitions, requests and gain, tribute and denying justice. This is its 
form. 
There rises in the third face of Virgo a white man, with a great body, 
wrapped in white linen, and with him is a woman holding in her hand black 
oil. This is a face of debility, age, infirmity, sloth, injury to limbs and the 
destruction of people. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face of Libra a man with a lance in his right 
hand, and in his left hand he holds a bird hanging by its feet. This is a face 
of justice, truth, good judgment, complete justice for the people and weak 
persons, and doing good for beggars. This is its form. 
There rises in the second face of Libra a black man, a bridegroom having 
a joyous journey. This is a face of tranquility, joy, abundance and good living. 
This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Libra a man riding a donkey with a wolf in 
front of him. This is a face of evil works, sodomy, adultery, singing, joy and 
flavors. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face of Scorpio a man with a lance in his right hand 
and in his left hand he holds the head of a man. This is a face of settlement, 
sadness, ill will and hatred. This is its form. 
There rises in the second face of Scorpio a man riding a camel, holding a 
scorpion in his hand. This is a face of knowledge, modesty, settlement, and of 
speaking evil of one another. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Scorpio a horse and a rabbit. This is a face 
of evil works and flavors, and forcing sex upon unwilling women. This is its 
form. 
There rises in the first face of Sagittarius the bodies of three men and 
one body is yellow, another white and the third is red. This is a face of heat, 
heaviness, growth in plains and fields, sustenance and division. This is its 
form. 
There rises in the second face of Sagittarius a man leading cows and in 
front of him he has an ape and a bear. This is a face of fear, lamentations, 
grief, sadness, misery and troubles. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Sagittarius a man with a cap on his head, 
who is murdering another man. This is a face of evil desires, adverse and evil 
effects, and fickleness in these and evil wishes, hatred, dispersion and evil 
conduct. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face of Capricorn a man with a reed in his right 
hand and a hoopoe bird in his left. This is a face of happiness, joy, and 
bringing things to an end that are sluggish, weak, and proceeding poorly. 
C&e PicatriF-JLtber Kiibeu* Ctrition 
This is its form. 
There rises in the second face of Capricorn a man with a common ape 
in front of him. This is a face of seeking to do what cannot be done and to 
attain what cannot be. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Capricorn a man holding a book which he 
opens and closes, and before him is the tail of a fish. This is a face of wealth 
and the accumulation of money and increase and embarking on trade and 
pressing on to a good end. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face of Aquarius a man whose head is mutilated 
and he holds a peacock in his hand. This is a face of misery, poverty and 
slavery. This is its form. 
There rises in the second face of Aquarius a man who looks like a king, 
who permits much to himself and abhors what he sees. This is a face of 
beauty and position, having what is desired, completion, detriment and 
debility. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Aquarius a man having a mutilated head, 
and an old woman is with him. This is a face of abundance, accomplishing of 
will, and of giving offense. This is its form. 
There rises in the first face of Pisces a man with two bodies, who looks 
as though he is giving a gesture of greetings with his hands. This is a face of 
peace and humility, debility, many journeys, misery, seeking wealth, miserable 
life. This is its form. 
There rises in the second face of Pisces a man upside down with his head 
below and his feet raised up, and in his hand is a tray from which the food has 
been eaten. This is a face of great reward, and of strong will in things that are 
high, serious and thoughtful. This is its form. 
There rises in the third face of Pisces a sad man full of evil thoughts, 
thinking of deception and treachery, and before him is a woman with 
a donkey climbing atop her, and in her hand is a bird. This is a face of 
advancement and lying with women with a great appetite, and of quiet and 
seeking rest. This is its form. 
You should know that in the aforesaid discussion of the faces of the signs 
there is the greatest secret of great benefit, that cannot be understood except 
by deep study in the art of astronomy by those who have good intellects and 
acute and subtle at extracting foundations and profound subtleties. This is 
because one planet has the power to impede the effects of another planet, and 
the power of a term is more powerful than the power of a face and the power 
of a face is more powerful than the power of a sign. 
This is because it is natural for one to advance over another, as water 
extinguishes the heat of fire, and fire carries off the coldness of water, and 
water moistens the dryness of earth, and earth dries up the moistness of air. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
7 
This happens because when natural things unite with one another and are 
pure, the strongest will conquer and prevail, and if many weak qualities join 
together, the strongest will be able to conquer entirely. If they are equal in 
their powers and effects, their work and effect will have a mixed nature. 
If there is one quality that is very abundant in its own remote place, its 
perfection is diminished and consumed in the way that health, after it is most 
strong, produces illness, and when fruits are ripe and ready to be harvested 
they fall off of the tree, and the little snake destroys and kills great snakes, and 
small and tiny worms when they join together kill a serpent, and the powerful 
is weakened by the weak according to his nature. You should carefully 
consider what we have said. 
The properties of these faces are such that you should observe everything 
that you ought necessarily to observe concerning the operations and bodies 
of each of the planets. When you make any of images of the faces described 
above, make them in a material appropriate to the planet that rules the face; 
then the work will be as we have said—that is, if you make the image when 
the corresponding planet is present in that face, then that work will be perfect 
and it will manifest in the world. If it happens that the Sun is rising in the 
hour of the planet or combines its force with it in a way that you desire,16'' the 
work will be stable and strong. In what we have said above, beware that the 
quality of the planet be not overcome by the Sun. If, on the other hand, you 
understand the reasons for everything that has already been said, the images 
of the faces we have given will bring about the effects you wish powerfully 
and completely. 
That is, if the Sun is in an amicable aspect for a benefic image, or an adverse 
aspect for a malefic one. 
C&e$fratw-ilfl>erHubeiW dftrttlon 
Chapter Twelve 
The figures and degrees of the signs and their effects according to the 
opinion of the Hindus, and how they proceed in the contemplations 
of this science, and in what manner the virtues of superior bodies are 
attracted according to the opinions of the same, with notable secrets 
The Hindu sages say, however, that the roots of the effects of the 
magical art are called decans.'"" They say that each part is called a 
decan, and given and assigned to the seven planets; and they also 
call the planet that rules each part a decan. The decans are found in this 
way. Each sign, as it rises, is divided into three equal parts, and the first part 
is attributed to the lord of the ascendant, the second to the lord of the fifth 
house and the third to the lord of the ninth house, and this is because the 
Ascendant, fifth and ninth are of the same triplicity. Works of magical art 
through the faces of the signs according to the opinion of the Indian sages are 
given below in order exactly as they have said. 
We begin with Aries, and we say that the first face is of Mars, in which 
an image can be made so that, by such images they are always victorious in 
battle, litigation and controversy and gain what they wish, and are never 
defeated; and in it can be made an image to hinder the milk of beasts and 
destroy their butter. 
The second face of Aries is of the Sun, and in this face you may make 
an image for kings and lords, to acquire their love and to turn aside their 
annoyance. 
The third face of Aries is of Jupiter, in which you may make an image 
for officials, deputies, judges of cities, and prelates, to place peace and 
benevolence between them and to reconcile them when they disagree. 
The first face ofTaurus is ofVenus, in which an image is made to place 
love between man and wife. 
The second face ofTaurus is of Mercury, and in it you may make an 
image to cause hostility and to bind the will and to cause disagreement 
between women. 
The third face ofTaurus is of Saturn, in which you may make an image 
to cause hatred and to bind men so they are not able to have sex with women, 
and conversely to cause women to sicken, and to separate men and women. 
The first face of Gemini is of Mercury, in which an image is made to 
harm the senses and intellect. 
170 
Hie word in the Latin text is adorugen, from the Arabic durayjan, "decan.' 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
119 
The second face of Gemini is ofVenus, and in it an image is made to 
bring back absent people and cause fugitives to come back to a place. 
The third face of Gemini is of Saturn, in which an image is made so that 
evil things will be spoken of whomever you wish, and so that disgrace will 
befall them. 
The first face of Cancer is of the Moon, and in it you may make an image 
when it is necessary to call forth clouds and rain and to bring home absent 
people, whether by land or by sea. 
The second face of Cancer is of Mars, and in it you may make an image 
to prevent unwanted rain and snow, and to banish unwanted snakes and wild 
beasts on land or sea. 
The third face of Cancer is of Jupiter, in which you may make an image 
for those on the sea to escape perils. 
The first face of Leo is of the Sun, in which you may make an image to 
acquire the love and benevolence of lords, and to bring together wolves, bears 
and wild beasts in any place that you wish. 
The second face of Leo is of Jupiter; in it you may make an image to 
chase away wolves and bears, so that herds are not harmed. 
The third face of Leo is of Mars, in which you may make an image to 
bring together bears, wolves and wild beasts in whichever city, village or place 
you wish. 
The first face of Virgo is of Mercury, and in it you may make an image to 
write well and to profit in your business. 
The second face of Virgo is of Saturn, in which you may make an image 
to destroy tools and writing instruments. 
The third face of Virgo is ofVenus; in it you may make an image to cause 
peace and love between women and their husbands. 
The first face of Libra is ofVenus, in which you may make an image 
when you wish to weaken the love of a woman, or the contrary. 
The second face of Libra is of Saturn; in it you may make an image for 
love according to everything that has been said before. 
The third face of Libra of Mercury, in which you may make an image for 
fugitives to return out of whichever place they are. 
The first face of Scorpio is of Mars, and in it you may make an image to 
bring together tarantulas, snakes and vipers in whatever place you wish. 
The second face of Scorpio is of Jupiter, in which you may make image to 
drive away tarantulas and snakes from whichever place you wish. 
The third face of Scorpio is of the Moon, and in it you may make an 
•mage to divert and hinder rains, and to prevent harm either from rains or 
from the sea. 
The first face of Sagittarius is of Jupiter, in which you may make an image 
120 
jC&e PicatriF-Jliber Kubetw CBDitfon 
for love and benevolence and companionship. 
The second face of Sagittarius is of Mars, and in it you may make an 
image to bring afflictions and illnesses to whoever you wish. 
The third face of Sagittarius is of the Sun, in which you may make an 
image to acquire the love and the grace of kings and superiors. 
The first face of Capricorn is of Saturn, in which you may make an image 
to hunt birds and beasts, and for the milk of herds to thrive and increase. 
The second face of Capricorn is ofVenus, and in it you may make an 
image to increase the milk of goats, and improve bees, and make them 
multiply in your area, and to call forth birds in any place you wish. 
The third face of Capricorn is of Mercury, in which you may make an 
image to destroy everything contained in the previous faces. 
The first face of Aquarius is of Saturn, in which you may make an image 
for love and friendship and companionship with the old, whether lords or 
servants, and to locate and take hold of treasures. 
The second face of Aquarius is of Mercury, and in it you may make an 
image for love and companionship with the young. 
The third face of Aquarius is ofVenus, in which you may make an image 
for love and benevolence from women. 
The first face of Pisces is of Jupiter, in which you may make an image for 
fishing in the sea and for a good voyage thereon. 
The second face of Pisces is of the Moon, and in it you may make an 
image for the benefit of plants and fruits and to call forth rain at the necessary 
time, and for fishes to congregate in any place you wish, either in rivers or in 
the sea. 
The third face of Pisces is of Mars, in which you may make an image for a 
good journey in military activities and for hunting birds and beasts. 
This is what is said of the faces that the Indians call decans. 
Hermes Trismegistus explains in his book On Images how to calculate 
images for each and every part of the human body and under which face of 
the signs to make them. Take pure gold and make a seal and write on it the 
image of a lion, with the Sun in Leo in the first or second face and in the 
Ascendant or midheaven, and the Moon not in her house,1''1 and the lord of 
the Ascendant not applying to an aspect with Saturn or Mars or separating 
from them. Bind the seal around the loins or kidneys. I have tested this, and 
found that one who does this will not suffer thereafter. I have also seen also a 
doctor use this seal to seal olibanum 1like wax; and patients that were given 
the seal in a drink were immediately freed from their illness. I myself have 
171 
That is, not in the sign of Cancer, which the Moon rules. 
172 
Olibanum: the resin of the Boswellia serrata tree, a close relative of the 
frankincense tree, used as incense. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
121 
made and sealed pills of goat's blood according to this method and it worked 
miraculously. This happens likewise for the sufferings of the other members 
of the body, according to their manner and form, and the appropriate 
symbolism of the planets. 
I have found another way to do this. Take pure gold, and make a sigil or 
a lamen in which you engrave the form of a lion while the Sun is in Leo, the 
Moon aspecting him but not in her rulership, and the lord of the ascendant 
neither aspecting Saturn nor receding from him. Bind this sigil as above. 
Aries. This figure is a ram with no tongue. Its properties are for all the 
infirmities of the head. While it may be made when the Sun is in the first or 
third or fifth degree of Aries, this figure will be of no benefit unless it is made 
when the Moon is waxing or full. These are the conditions of the figure. 
Saturn and Mars must be direct, Jupiter is not in Aquarius and Venus is not 
in Virgo, which is the sign of her fall, and Mercury is not in Taurus; make 
the figure between the first degree of Aries and the fifth degree of the first 
face, and do not make it in the second face (they have said elsewhere that the 
second face pertains to the eyes and the third to the ears, whence you must 
pay attention to the degrees), and when the Sun and Jupiter are completely 
above the earth; and make it in the hour of the Sun. Others say that it is 
good in the day and hour of Jupiter. And make it from gold and silver to the 
weight of 7 grains of common wheat. This is proven.1"1 
Taurus. Its image is placed above the liver and is for all its infirmities. 
Make it in the first face, between the first degree and the ninth. Let Saturn 
not be in Pisces nor the Moon in Scorpio and make Mars direct, since it 
ought to cause great change. Make it in the day and hour of the Sun, and 
do not have the Sun below the earth. Do not make it in the second face of 
Taurus, for they say elsewhere that the second face is for infirmities of the gall 
bladder, and the third face is for infirmities of the windpipe. Make the image 
in the form of a bull with a great head, small mouth, and great eyes. Make it 
of red bronze. 
Gemini. Its image is placed upon the spleen and is for all its infirmities. 
Make it from the first degree to the tenth. Let the Sun be above the earth; 
and with Jupiter in Gemini it is much more powerful because Jupiter 
diminishes the spleen. Gemini has two bodies twisted together, in the form 
of two men up to the navel, and from the navel is one body; and in one 
hand it holds a staff. Make it from silver in the day and hour of the Sun and 
the first face of Gemini; in the second and third faces, you will find that it 
damages other members of the body. 
Cancer. Its image is placed on the stomach for all its infirmities. Make 
173 
Et expertum est in Latin, the standard conclusion for the recipe for a 
medicine in medieval pharmacology. 
IZZ 
E t p Picatrip-Jlfljer Kabeaf Ctrition 
it in the first face and from the first degree to the fifth; the second face is not 
assigned to these infirmities, for it is assigned to the infirmities of the lower 
intestine. Be careful that Saturn and Jupiter are not retrograde, and that Mars 
is in Taurus and the Moon waxing and the Sun is descending (that is after 
noon) and Leo is above the earth. And do not make it except on Sunday and 
do not make it except from the first hour until the eighth hour or in the first 
and the eighth. Make it in gold or silver. Its image is the image of a crab. Be 
careful that Capricorn is not in the middle house (according to the opinion of 
the masters of doctrine the middle house is the sixth or eighth house). Taurus 
should not be in the fourth house; and be careful with these conditions, 
because all of them are necessary. This image is for the sufferings of colic. If 
you are able to make it in the night of the Sun and in his hour,'"4 it is very 
good. 
Leo. His image is placed over the right kidney and is for all of the 
infirmities of the kidneys. Make the image in the form of a lion without a 
tongue, straight and not twisted. Make it in the day and hour of the Sun, 
from the first degree until the tenth degree of the first face. Let Mars be 
direct; and if Saturn and Jupiter should be in the same sign, the seal will be 
useless. If the Moon is in Leo, let it be waxing, and if she is in other signs, 
have no fear, so long as she is not in the fourth, fifth or sixth houses. Saturn 
must not be in the eighth house. Make the seal in gold or silver, and engrave 
it or stamp it in one blow. Let the weather not be cloudy, and do not make 
it in the middle of the fifth degree or higher, and let the Sun be above the 
earth. The second face is assigned to the ribs that are in front of the kidneys, 
and this is proved. Others say to imprint the image in mastic, when the Sun 
is in Leo, and when the time comes that it is necessary, soften it for ten days 
in wine and drink all of it, and it cures all illnesses of the kidneys for a whole 
year. 
The Conciliator1"1 said to make these images when the Sun is in the 21st 
degree of Leo, and let it represent a lion with stones before him. Let them 
tie this sigil on the lower back above the kidneys. I have also seen physicians 
stamp olibanum with it like wax; and give the seal in a drink to patients 
who have kidney troubles, and at once they were cured. I myself have sealed 
lozenges of goat's blood, and they worked miraculously. 
Virgo. Its image is a woman wrapped in cloth riding on a lion, and 
in her hand she has a staff or iron. It is placed over all infirmities of the 
left kidney, and for people over five years old. And there are many other 
174 
The Picatrix uses an unusual system of planetary hours, in which night 
of the Sun is Saturday night from sunset on, rather than Sunday night; see "The 
Operation of the Moon" in Book III chapter 9, where this is made clear. 
175 
The reference is to the magical textbook Conciliator by the great medieval 
mage Peter of Abano, which contains a similar working. 
Boob 333 Chapter 3 ,4, 
conditions laid out in the Book of Images, yet I will explain the ones that 
are most necessary. Saturn, Jupiter and Mars should be retrograde, the 
Moon should not be in the fifth house nor the Sun in the eighth house, nor 
is Jupiter in Aquarius nor Saturn in Leo nor Aldebaran under the earth nor 
Algamidiruspis with the Moon nor in aspect with her, nor should Saturn nor 
Mars be contrary (that is opposite) nor Jupiter in the midheaven. Make it 
with the Sun in the first to fifth degree of the first face of Virgo. Make the 
image of a man riding on a lion. This has great properties, and with this the 
sages of India agree because they have proven it. Make it in silver or gold in 
the day and hour of the Sun, and do not change anything here and be careful 
of the number of the degrees. 
Libra. Its image is placed over all infirmities of the stomach. Make it 
in the first face from the first degree until the tenth. Venus should not be 
retrograde nor Jupiter in Libra, and the Sun should be above the earth, and 
make it in the day of Jupiter from the first hour until the fifth. Make it from 
gold or silver to the weight of seven medium grains of wheat. The sages of 
India do not change their custom; rather, they make it in the day and hour of 
the Sun, and it is proven that it should not be made on a cloudy day. Also, 
if the Sun is able to shine upon the image, it will not be as good, as Enoch 
wrote; and this is proven. 
It is said that the image of Libra ought to be one man climbing or 
walking upright, and in his hand he holds a scale so that it balances, and on 
his head a bird who is half white and half black. This is drawn at noon when 
the Moon is not waning. If she is in Libra, it is best to be cautious about the 
number and form, and this is proven. It is likewise proven that it is found 
best in the first degree; and according to their opinion it ought to be made 
when Jupiter is above the earth and in his day, and it is good for it to be made 
by engraving rather than stamping. 
Scorpio. Some specify that its image is that of a crow and others its image 
is that of a man with a crow in his hand; and both of these are by experiment. 
It is placed over the infirmities of the remaining intestines. Make it when the 
Moon is waxing and in the day and hour of the Sun; and the Sun is above the 
earth; and make it in the first face; at a time that is not cloudy. The Hindus 
also specify that Saturn should be above the earth. Make it in the first face 
from the first degree to the eleventh. 
Sagittarius. Its image is a man shooting arrows with a bow. Enoch 
says that it rises obliquely and its head is curved; and holds a bird in its left 
hand. And it is placed over all infirmities of the right hand; and it is greatly 
recommended against forgetfulness because it is good at expelling all of the 
176 
Probably Algamus Dhira, the two stars alpha and beta Canis Minor, 
Procyon and Goineisa. 
124 
C&e ^catrijc-Jlfljer Uubeiw tuition 
infirmities of Saturn, Mars and Venus. Let Saturn not be retrograde, nor 
Mars in the twelfth house, nor Jupiter in the fourth house; and the Sun 
should be above the earth, and the weather should not be cloudy. Make it of 
gold or silver in the first face, from the first degree until the fifth, in the day 
and hour of the Sun. 
Capricorn. Its image is one white lamb, and the middle of its stomach 
is black. It is placed over all of the infirmities of the left hand, and expels the 
infirmities of Mercury and the Moon. Let Mercury not be retrograde and 
let it be above the earth; and let Saturn be under the earth and Venus above 
the earth in the east, as Enoch says. But the Hindus say that it must be made 
in the day and hour of the Sun or in the day of Mercury and the hour of the 
Sun; but this latter is not as good as the former. Make it in the first face, 
between the first degree and the tenth. Some specify its quality as laughter 
and weeping (that is, it counters laughter and weeping), while others say it 
counters angry men and restores them to being agreeable. 
Aquarius. Its image is a man holding two pitchers. And it is placed 
over all infirmities of the right foot. Let Saturn, Jupiter and Mars be not 
retrograde, and the Moon be above the earth, and Venus under the earth. 
Others place this image over all infirmities of the feet. Make it in the first 
face from the first degree until the fourth. It will carry away all wicked 
contemplations of the heart. Others specify it for causing delight. Make it in 
the day and hour of the Sun, when Jupiter is not combust of the Sun, and the 
Sun is not elevated above Jupiter, and Saturn is in the degree of the ascendant. 
Pisces. Its image is placed over all infirmities of the left foot. You 
may make it when the Moon is in the midheaven; and Mars is not in the 
midheaven, Jupiter is not retrograde and the Sun is above the earth, and it 
is not cloudy. Make it entirely in the first face, as the second face is located 
over the shins and the third over the hips. Others specify that the third is 
against the cruelty of men, and the Hindus have proven this. Make it from 
gold and not from any other metal. Other say that that tin is good or mastic. 
And make it during the day. These forms that we have said above are what 
Hermes specifies in his book of calculation. 
One of the great sages of the Hindus says that the infusion of the fixed 
virtue of the stars is not completed without consecration, purification, and 
the investigation and assessment of the will, by which the virtues of superior 
bodies are as the forms of material powers, and inferior forms are as material 
for the virtues of superior bodies, and each is joined to the other accordingly 
as one draws the other. This is because all corporeal substances are one 
substance, just as all spiritual substances are one substance. 
And some sages among t h e m 1 " say that virtues and powers are subtle 
177 
That is, among the Hindus. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
127 
things that are made by God, and put by Him in the world above his 
creatures out of His benevolence and love; concerning which these same sages 
have made many books concerning this, and all have been written with a 
subtle and acute intelligence. When they seek to attain and come to a higher 
level than the Law allows, first they must pay the penalty in their bodies and 
purify themselves from everything sordid. They used to begin in the first 
hour of the Lord's day, which day and hour are properly attributed to the Sun, 
and fasted for forty days from the consumption of meat, and fed on things 
born from the earth, and on seeds and herbs. They used to eat less and less 
each day until the forty days were over, and what they ate on the last day of 
the forty days was one-fortieth what they ate at first. In all this fasting they 
used to use medicines which removed the desire to eat and drink, though they 
never lacked the opportunity to do so. 
When they had done as just described, there used to come into their 
spirits a subtle and acute intelligence, and they used to understand whatever 
they wished, and retained and increased their wills and senses; and they 
diminished the terrestrial and ponderous parts of themselves, and the subtle 
and acute parts of them became apparent, and they used to show an appetite 
and taste for ascending to the world above, and to the place from which 
spirits come, and they abhorred the flavors, repose, and delights of this world. 
When they had done this, it was then fitting for them to draw down virtues 
and powers from heaven, with which they would speak, and accomplish 
marvels, and those who wished would perceive what was to come and know 
the future periods of their lives, and they would receive laws from the powers 
which they would freely enact; and they obeyed the spirits of the stars. 
In this book are the great secrets which they called the truth about things, 
by which they knew God Most High and recognized him as the maker and 
creator of all things. They asserted that those who engaged in this work 
did so only in order to come to an understanding of God and His unity, so 
that they might be illumined by His light. What we have said here in the 
foregoing, we say only so that the foundations of these things might be shown 
and their effects and consecrations might be collected, as they are preserved in 
their books. 
So great are the marvels thereof that if we wished to tell of them, it would 
be as hard to recount as to hear them, and this book of ours would become 
too long and prolix, and we would wander from our theme. But we must 
speak of the incredible head which the soothsayers esteem as much as the 
Head of the Dragon, that is to say, the North Node of the Moon. They first 
find a blond, hairy, dark blue eyed man with a monobrow and entice him 
into their temple with tales of its mysteries. They seize him and place him 
in a barrel of sesame oil up to his neck. They nail a cover on the barrel, seal 
C&e PicatriF-Jliber ttuboi* Cftrtrton 
it with lead and let his head stick out, while his body remains in oil. Now 
they feed him daily a definite quantity of dried figs, soaked in sesame oil, and 
suffumigate his nose and his face with incense. They do it 40 days without 
interruption. They give him no water to drink, and what he gives of himself, 
remains in the oil. Finally, his tendons are slack, his joints soft, his veins full 
of fluid and he is soft as wax. Then a suitable day is determined at which they 
gather and burning incense pull his head from his body at the first vertebra. 
As the head is pulled out so that the nerves remain hanging out, the body 
remains in the oil. Then they put the head in a wall niche on a layer of burned 
olive ashes covered with embroidered cotton fabric. They suffumigate this 
head with incense and it tells them whether prices will expensive or cheap, 
whether dynasties will riese or fall and everything else that will happen in the 
world. His eyes remain open, but longer blink. And the head exhorts them 
to the worship of the planets and tells what will happen to them personally. 
If they ask the head about science and art, he responds to them. Also they 
take the remaining body from the barrel to remove the liver and cut, then 
they can see from its sign concerning their own affairs. The shoulder blades, 
and certain passages in his joints are used for divining their affairs as well. 
They shave their heads, do not eat and drink, except in his name. In time of 
al-Muqtadir they were discovered, and he ordered their temple opened. They 
found the head in it, and they were expelled from the temple ordered to bury 
the head. Therefore we return to our theme, usefully leaving the aforesaid. 
I say now what the sage Alraze1"* wrote in a magical book, in which he 
specified each constellation and tested what it was assigned to. In all works 
of magic for love, friendship and alliance or all things thing to be done, we 
ought to see that the Moon conjoins Venus or forms an aspect with the sign 
Pisces, or that the Moon in Pisces forms an aspect with Venus in Taurus; 
if you attend closely to the preceding, you will obtain your intention in a 
marvelous way and fulfill what you wish. 
When you wish to do any evil thing, we ought to see that the Moon is in 
Cancer or Libra forms an aspect with Mars, or conjoins him in the Ascendant 
or seventh house; the evil that you ask for will be fulfilled. In all workings in 
which you wish blood to flow swiftly, place the Moon in a water sign. In all 
workings for discord and hatred, place the Moon in Aries or see that Cancer 
forms a square aspect with Saturn, or conjoins him. In operations in which 
you wish to bind tongues, place the Moon under the Sun's beams and let our 
operations be done at night. 
In every working you do for kings, old men, and nobles, place the Moon 
in aspect to the Sun in his sign or exaltation, and in the midheaven; when 
178 
Abu-Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi (850-923 CE), known in 
medieval Europe as Rhazes, a famous Muslim physician and philosopher. 
Boob 33 Chapter 12 
127 
this is done our petition will be fulfilled. In all workings for prelates, judges, 
leaders, and laws that are to be introduced, place the Moon in aspect with 
Jupiter in Pisces or Sagittarius, in the midheaven, and your work will be even 
more strengthened and complete. In all workings concerning law, scribes, 
servants of kings, or tenants who give returns to kings, place the Moon 
aspecting Mercury, Mercury being in Gemini or Virgo, and the Moon full; 
and then your business will be able to carried out. 
You should understand that the square aspect of the Moon with any 
planet is more apparent according to nature; and this is when it is in any of 
the four angles, the strongest of which is the midheaven. In all operations for 
prosperity, see that there are aspects to fortunate planets, but for evil effects 
do not have aspects to the fortunes, but only with the infortunes. When you 
wish to do any form of evil work, see that an infortune is in aspect, because 
from the strength and power of Saturn and Mars the preceding effects are 
carried out, because they are stronger and more powerful in this type of work. 
Similarly, you should know that the aspects of the Moon with planets are 
more powerful when the Moon is oriental of the Sun and in front of him, and 
not when she is behind him. The aspect of the Moon and the Sun by sextile 
or trine is good in all high works in which you seek treasure, great wealth, 
royal power, honor and victory. When in the all of the preceding operations 
the Moon is in the tenth house, the effects are good and very strong in 
completing the work, which cannot be when she is in the fourth or seventh 
houses, nor when the Moon is waning or combust of the Sun. 
The trine, sextile, square and opposition aspects of the Moon to Venus are 
appropriate to all effects, nevertheless it is not as good as the aspects of Jupiter 
which indeed are useful and powerful in all operations. Still, in works of 
agreement, love, and lasting friendship with women and in similar works the 
aspects ofVenus are better and more powerful for all of the preceding things 
that are specifically attributed to Venus, the strongest of which is the trine 
aspect with the Moon in an earth or water sign. And if by chance the Moon 
is in a fire or air sign, have her rising. 
The sage Alraze mentioned above, who recounted the foregoing, was 
a man worthy of belief in every science, because he was a sage and a seeker 
of knowledge and a tester of things, having studied much in ancient books. 
Geber Abnehayem,'™ however, was the great sage who wrote many books in 
this science, such as the book which he named Book of the Secrets of Magic, 
and another, the Great Book divided into eighty chapters, and another which 
he named Book of Keys containing the figures of the degrees, along with their 
effects and judgments, and another On the Astrolabe in which he presented all 
•79 
Jabir ibn Hayyan (721-776 CE), known in medieval Europe as Geber, the 
greatest of the Muslim alchemists. 
128 
jECtie ^atrir-Jlfljer ftubeua <£Dttton 
the operations of the astrolabe, which is divided into a thousand chapters, in 
which he gave many works and marvelous effects that no one had recounted 
before him, and his great book which he called Complete Book of Magic, and 
compiled in his teachings the wisdom of every science and other marvels that 
were always hidden away by the wise. 
This same man observed everything encompassed in the science of 
magical images and the effects of the figures of heaven and the powers of 
the planets and the works of nature; out of which this sage composed all the 
foregoing, and extracted the motion and effect of the Sun which had been 
proven by the calculations of mathematicians. Because of his merit I have 
called him a sage, and have taken him as my master, and become his disciple, 
even though so great a time lies between us. I pray to God that He grant him 
eternal life, and grant him a high place among the souls of the saints. 
The great sage Plato, however, wrote two books about magic, that is, 
the Greater and the Lesser. In the Greater he wrote about the effects of the 
figures of heaven, from which he described great marvels, such as walking 
upon water, and changing into the form of any animal you desire, or into 
some composite form never before heard of in this world, and calling down 
rain at times when it ought not to rain and preventing rain when it ought to 
rain, and making stars move and cast down rays out of their proper times, and 
burning down hostile cities as well as ships at sea and remote places that you 
wish to burn, and ascending into the air, and making stars appear at times 
incongruent for their appearance so that they seem to fall from heaven, and 
speaking with the dead, and making it appear as though the Sun and Moon 
were divided into many parts, and making ropes and spears appear to be 
serpents and dragons, eating anyone they encounter, and making long and 
short journeys pass in the blink of an eye. 
All the foregoing that we have described are brought about by the powers 
and virtues of figures and by the strong attraction of spirits that will be 
obedient to us, and by the strong composition of the bodies of the figures of 
materials brought together from this inferior world. From these come the 
spiritual motions that move all bodies, by which motions marvels are brought 
about, as well as works that are not done by human beings, but appear to 
belong almost to the category of miracles. For the same reason all the books 
composed by this sage are full of figures which he describes and exhorts us to 
understand, and to learn their properties and effects, and by what path we are 
able to achieve effects if we follow it in every detail. 
This is what Pythagoras, speaking of the figures of heaven, said: that 
they are examples representing other figures of the world. He said also that 
in the higher world there is a durable substance that our senses are not able 
to perceive. Geber Abnehayem composed a book about this science which he 
called the Complete Book, which explains what is a rational animal and what 
is an irrational animal. It also speaks in this book, speaking according to 
natural reason, about what is assimilated to the effects of nature, but all that 
Plato said, according to heavenly reason, Geber said about the powers and 
effects of spiritual figures composed of natural materials. In this book of ours, 
if God wills, all of the foregoing will be explained with reasons for the effects 
of the figures of heaven, all of which will be explained in an appropriate place, 
according to our judgment, together with all that we have found in the books 
of the wise and experienced in our own time of the effects of figures, signs, 
and planets. 
But ttjuJ ttconft boob of our* to noto at an etiD. 
C&e Picatrip-JLiber Kubetia dDOition 
^cricuo 
Book Three 
Booft 3 3 3 
Book Three 
ere begins the third book of Picatrix, in which are treated the 
properties of the planets and signs; and their forms and figures, given 
in their proper colors; and how it is possible to speak to the spirits of 
the planets, and many other works of magic. 
Chapter One: The parts of the planets that exist in plants, 
animals, and metals. 
Chapter Two: The parts of the signs in the aforesaid three 
parts of existence, that is, plants, animals, and metals 
Chapter Three: The figures, tinctures, vestments, and 
suffumigations of the planets as well asthe tinctures of the 
faces of the signs 
Chapter Four: W h y the secrets of this science cannot be 
understood except a little at a time 
Chapter Five: A demonstration of the proper virtue of 
animals and notable things necessary in this science, and how 
planetary spirits are attracted by figures and suffumigations 
Chapter Six: The magistery of drawing planetary spirits with 
natural things, and what a magical image is and how it can 
have this power 
Chapter Seven: Attracting the virtues of the planets, and 
how we may speak with them, and how their influences 
are divided among planets, figures, sacrifices, prayers, 
suffumigations, and propositions; and the state of the 
heavens necessary to each planet. 
Chapter Eight: The way of prayer with which the Nabateans 
used to pray to the Sun and Saturn, and how they would 
speak to them and their spirits and draw forth their 
influences 
Chapter Nine: H o w to attract the powers of each planet and 
the powers of their spirits, naming them according to their 
ICfjt ^fcatrfjdUber Hubeu* Cftntion 
parts, and how to accomplish this by speaking their names 
Chapter Ten: 
A demonstration of the confections of 
planetary spirits, and preventing dangers from ceremonies 
and effects, and of the wonders of magic, and of the food, 
suffumigations, unguents, and odors that one who invokes 
planetary spirits ought to use; and the proper effects, and 
works that are not done except in appearance 
Chapter Eleven: The effects of magical images in diverse 
things, as well as in alterations of sight, so that things are 
seen other than as they are; and causing sleep and waking, 
and making poisons and their remedies 
Chapter Twelve: Rules necessary in this science 
Boob 333 C&apter i 
Chapter One 
The parts of the planets that exist in plants, animals and metals 
J i L^k aving spoken in the preceding book of the images and figures of 
l _ J t h e heavens and the other figures that are found there, we will 
now explain which figures or faces in this world are compared to 
the celestial figures. You should know that as the Sun passes from place 
to place in the circle of the signs his effects are diverse, and this diversity is 
produced by the diversity of the planets and fixed stars. Therefore when 
there is anything that you wish to arrange, you should look for a time that is 
appropriate to your intention, when the celestial figures favor your work, and 
then your working will have the effect that we intend it to have naturally, and 
by means of the resemblance of terrestrial to celestial things and the coming 
together of the two natures, namely the terrestrial and celestial. 
Into that which is terrestrial, the celestial virtue is poured in, and in it 
the spiritual motion and alteration will be most according to your desire. 
Therefore workings with images are done in two ways, that is, by the virtues 
of the heavens and by the virtues of natural things of the earth. Thus in this 
third book we will speak of all the images in magic according to the science 
of images, and its highest achievements. In this place we will relate in detail 
the effects and powers that every planet has individually, and their effects and 
powers of magic. 
First we will speak of Saturn. Saturn is the source of the retentive 
virtue.1™ He rules profound sciences, and the science of laws and seeking out 
the causes and roots of things and their effects, and speaking of wonders and 
understanding deep and secret qualities. Among languages he rules Hebrew 
and Chaldean; among the external organs the right ear; among internal 
organs, the spleen, which is the source of melancholy by which all members 
are reciprocally connected. Among religions,m he has that of the Jews; and 
among clothing all black clothing; among professions, those that work with 
the earth, plowing, digging, extracting minerals, builders, and architects; 
among tastes, those that are unpleasant; among places, black mountains, 
dark rivers, deep wells, and desert boundaries and places; among stones, onyx 
and all black stones; among metals lead, iron and all metals that are black 
and smell bad; among trees, elder trees, oaks, carubia trees, palms and vines; 
among herbs, cumin, rue, onions and all plants that have thick leaves; of 
180 
This virtue, and the others named in this chapter, are drawn from medieval 
niedicine. 
181 
"Laws" in the original, but religious teachings are clearly meant. 
' H 
C&e Vwatm-Wbtt iftubeiw coition 
medicines, aloe, myrrh and similar things, white lead1"- and colocynth;18:i of 
incense, strong cassia and storax; among animals, black camels, pigs, apes, 
bears, dogs and cats; among birds, all that have long necks and coarse voices, 
and cranes, ostriches, duga, crows, and all animals that thrive under ground; 
among small animals, those that are dry and stinking. Among colors he has 
all dark and tawny colors. 
Jupiter is the source of the augmentative virtue. He rules over laws 
and the legal profession, jurisprudence, and skill in obtaining petitions, 
repayments and retentions, and he guards against mortal illnesses. He rules 
wisdom, philosophy and the interpretation of dreams; among languages, 
he has Greek; among external organs, the left ear; among internal organs, 
the liver who rectifies the complexion and humors; among religions, that 
which unites all; among clothing, that which is white and expensive. Among 
productive and unproductive professions, he governs ruling and correcting 
laws and selling treasures; among tastes, those that are sweet; among places, 
oratories, and all places that are famous, full of treasure, and holy; among 
stones, emerald and all white and yellow stones, and crystal, and all stones 
that are bright and considered precious; among metals, tin and tutia;1"1 nuts, 
hazelnuts, pines, pistachios, and all trees that bear fruit, fruit having a rind; 
among herbs, white mint, all herbs that are fruitful with a good odor; among 
medicines saffron, yellow sandalwood, nutmeg, camphor, amber and mace; 
among animals, all animals that are beautiful and valued for their appearance, 
those which are sacrificed, and all inoffensive, clean, and precious animals 
such as camels, beavers, stags, gazelles; among birds, those that are beautiful 
and colorful, such as peacocks, roosters, pigeons and quail; among small 
animals, the kind that work, such as silk worms. Among colors he has red 
tending toward white. 
Mars is the source of the attractive virtue. He rules over the science of 
nature and rules surgery, and mastery of beasts, and extracting teeth and 
letting blood and circumcision. Among languages he has Persian; among 
external organs, the right nostril; among internal organs, the gall bladder 
from which choler and heat come; of instincts, that which rouses to anger 
and battle. Among religions, he has heretics and those who change from one 
faith to another; among clothing, linen and the skins of rabbits and dogs and 
garments made of several different skins; among professions, blacksmithing 
and weapon making and robbery; among tastes, those that are hot, dry and 
bitter; among places, strong fortresses, places that are defensible and warlike, 
182 
Ceruse, traditionally known as "spirits of Saturn." 
183 
A bitter melon used in medieval medicine. 
184 
Tutia: an impure zinc oxide, a byproduct of traditional methods of making 
brass. 
HBoofe 333 C&apter i 
,J5 
and place where fire burns, and where animals are slaughtered and where 
wolves, bears and wild animals congregate, and places of judgment; among 
stones, granite, and all stones that are red and dark; and of metals, red gold 
and sulfur and petroleum and glass and red bronze; among trees, all trees 
whose nature is hot, such as pepper, pines, scammony, cumin, cocnidium, 
laurel, euphorbia, hemlock, trees that are useful and burn easily; and of 
medicines everything that has a bad complexion and kills and consumes 
because of great heat; and of scents red sandalwood; and of animals, red 
camels and all animals that have great red teeth, and dangerous wild animals; 
among small animals those that do evil like vipers, scorpions, mice and the 
like; among colors, intense red. 
The Sun is the light of the world and the governor of the cosmos, and 
is the source of the generative virtue. He rules philosophy, augury, and the 
exposition of jurisprudence. Among languages he has French, and he shares 
the Greek language with Mercury;18"' among external organs, the eyes, and 
among internal organs, the heart, which rules the organs of the body and 
is the source of heat, granting life to the whole body; and of religions, the 
religion of the Sabaeans and the those who pray to the spirits of the planets; 
among clothes, those that are precious and noble, those that are made of gold; 
among tastes, those that are thick and sweet; among places, great cities, royal 
and beautiful, in which kings linger, and lofty and expensive places; among 
stones, ruby and jacinth; among metals, gold; among trees, those that are 
lofty and beautiful, such as palms that grow tall; among herbs, saffron, roses, 
wheat, grains and olives which he shares with Saturn; among medicines, aloe 
wood, sandalwood, shellac and all whose complexion is hot and sharp; among 
odors, good aloe wood; among beasts, those that are valuable and useful to 
man, oxen, horses, camels, rams, cows and all animals that have great strength 
and power; among birds, those which are kept by kings, falcons, eagles, and 
peacocks in part; and he also has great serpents, and shares bears with Mars; 
among colors those that are reddish, and yellow like gold. 
Venus is the source of the power of flavor. And she rules grammar and 
the art of measuring sound and song. Among languages she has Arabic; 
among the internal organs, the right nostril, and among internal organs, those 
that meet in sexual intercourse and project sperm,180 and the stomach, and 
those from which come the virtue and flavor in eating and drinking; among 
religion, Islam; among clothing, all painted clothing; and of professions, all 
professions of painting and shaping, selling things that smell good, playing 
1 8 5 
This is in the original, even though an earlier paragraph assigns Greek to 
Jupiter and a later paragraph gives the Turkish language to Mercury. 
1 8 6 
This includes the vagina as well as the penis; medieval medical theory 
classified vaginal secretions as the female equivalent of semen. 
i?* 
C&e ^ a t r i r - J l i b e r Kubeus coition 
instruments that are good to listen to, singing, dancing and making stringed 
instruments; among flavors, all sweet things that taste good; and of places, 
place of vice, places in which men seek healing, and in which men dance, and 
places of cheerfulness where there is singing and speech, and places of ladies 
and beautiful women, and also places of eating and drinking; and of precious 
stones, pearls, and of rocks, lapis lazuli and almartach; and of plants, all plants 
with a good odor like saffron and arhenda, roses and all flowers with a good 
odor and smell and are pleasant to look at; among medicines balsam and 
grains of julep, and those that emit a strong smell, such as nutmeg and amber; 
among animals, females, camels that are beautiful and all beautiful animals 
with symmetrical bodies such as gazelles, sheep, gazelles, hares, partridges, 
calandras and the like. Among small animals, she has those that are colorful 
and beautiful; among colors, sky blue and gold tending a little to green. 
Mercury is the source of the intellective virtue. And he has rulership over 
learning sciences and wisdom and dialectic, grammar, philosphy, geometry, 
astronomy and astrology, geomancy, the notory art,1*' augury by birds 
according to their flight, and interpreting the language of the Turks and other 
peoples; among the external organs of a man, the visible tongue; among the 
internal organs, the brain and heart, from which flow the intellect and powers 
that arrange things in order, and the sensitive memory; among religions, 
those that are forbidden, and that of those who speculate about religion, and 
those who delight in the ways of philosophy, and those who live according 
to the senses; among clothing, linen clothing; among professions, preaching, 
writing verse, building carriages, geometry, interpreting dreams, debuxandi 
and drawing, and all professions that are discovered through subtle thought; 
among tastes, those that are sharp; among places, houses of preaching and 
places where subtle masters work, and springs of water, streams, reservoirs 
and wells; among stones, all stones shaped and inscribed; among minerals, 
mercury, and all stones that are raised up and used in noble works; among 
plants, reeds, kapok, flax, pepper, and all plants with a sharp smell like cloves, 
and all trees with fruit that has an outer rind; among medicine, all gums; 
among things that smell good, those which are for medicine and health 
maintenance, such as ginger and spikenard and the like; and of animals, 
humans, small camels, zebras, rumas, apes, wolves, and all animals that jump 
or run swiftly and all beasts that feed through trickery; among birds, those 
that fly smoothly and clearly and those with perception and understanding, 
and those that have pleasant voices; among small animals, those that move 
quickly such as ants and the like, and of colors, blue and mixed colors. 
187 
The notory art was a branch of medieval magic designed to assist learning. 
Each branch of knowledge had certain notae or diagrams, andthe magician 
concentrated 011 the nota for the art or science he wished to learn while repeating a 
specific prayer. 
Boob 333 Chapter 2 ,4, 
The Moon receives the virtues of the planets and pours them out into 
the world, and is the source of the natural virtue. And she has rulership 
over geometry and arithmetic and of the conjunction of waters and weight 
and measure, and high knowledge, magic and medicine and petitions and 
ancient things. Among languages she has German; among the external 
organs of man the left eye; among internal organs, the lungs, from which 
proceed respiration; among religions, those that pray to idols and images; 
among clothing, hides and scarves; among professions, polishing, leather 
working, minting money, and sailing; among tastes, those that have no taste 
like water; among stones, very small pearls; among metals, silver and those 
having a white body; among trees, iris and reeds, and all white trees with a 
good odor and all born in the earth that do not rise above their roots; and all 
small plants and all stalks and all plants that are grazed; among places, springs 
of water, lakes, swamps and places of snow and wherever water is found; 
and of medicines those that are for maintaining health and healing such as 
cinnamon, ginger, pepper and the like; among animals, red horses, mules, 
donkeys, cows and hares; among birds, all birds smooth in their motion, and 
all animals born or living in the air, and all water birds, and birds that are 
colored white. She has white snakes, and her colors are saffron and red. 
Know that the nature of the Head of the Dragon is to augment; when it 
is with fortunate planets it increases them in honor and strength, and if he 
is with unfortunates he augments them in condemnation and bad fortune. 
Similarly the Tail of the Dragon has the nature of diminution. And when it 
is with fortunate planets it diminishes their good and with infortunates it 
diminishes their evil and condemnation. And we have reminded you of the 
preceding so you can know it and value it. 
Chapter Two 
O f the parts of the signs in the aforesaid three existences, 
that is, plants, animals, and minerals 
3
n the same way that the planets have rulership over things, so also the 
signs have rulership over things. We begin with the first sign, Aries. 
Aries rules, among the organs of the body, the head, the face, the 
Pupil of the eye and ears; among colors, yellow and red mixed; and bitter 
tastes; and sandy places, places of fire and places where robbers gather; among 
Petals and minerals, those that are worked with fire; among animals, those 
with hooves whose feet are covered. 
.,8 
!D&e Mcatrijp-Jliber Kubeu* CUitlon 
Taurus rules, among the organs of the body, the neck and the trachea, 
and all populated places and those created by plowing; among trees, all tall 
trees and those that produce fruit, and those that do not need water, and all 
that have good tastes and smells; among animals, all quadrupeds and those 
with hooves. 
Gemini rules, among the organs of the body, the shoulders, arms and 
hands; among colors, green tending toward yellow; among tastes, sweet; 
among places, house and cultivated places in high mountains; among trees, 
those that are tall; among animals, men and apes; among birds, water birds 
and all those with a good voice and that readily make songs. 
Cancer rules, among the organs of the body, the chest, breasts, stomach, 
lungs, ribs and the secret places of the chest; among colors, tawny and smoky; 
among tastes, salty; among places, lakes of water, swamps, and places where 
waters flow together, the seashore and the shores of rivers; among stones, 
those that are in the water; among trees, those that grow tall in the water; 
among animals, those thriving in the water, such as small fishes, snakes, 
scorpions, vipers and terrestrial reptiles. 
Leo rules, among the organs of the body, the noble parts, the heart, the 
thinner ribs and back; among colors, red, yellow and brown; among places, 
those easily defended and strong, the cities of kings and strong castles and 
holy places; among tastes, bitter; among stones, those that are red, diamond 
and jacinth; among metals, gold; among trees, those that are tall; among 
animals, those that have long teeth; among birds, raptors. 
Virgo rules, among the organs of the body, the belly and of the internal 
organs, the intestines, the lower bones of the belly, and the abdominal organs; 
among colors, white and tawny; among tastes, those that are astringent; 
among places, places where women gather and places of joking and singing; 
among trees those that produce seeds; among animals, men; among birds, 
those that swim in water. 
Libra rules, among the organs of the body, the hips and buttocks, sexual 
organs, and the upper belly; among colors, green, violet and tawny; among 
tastes, sweet; among places, deserts, sand, hunting grounds, and high and 
lofty places from which many things can be seen; among trees, those that are 
tall and straight; among animals, men; among birds those with large heads. 
Scorpio rules, among the organs of the body, all of the sexual organs of 
men and women, among colors, green, red and tawny; among tastes, salty; 
among places, dry lands, prisons, and sad places; and stony places where 
scorpions gather; among stones, coral and marine pearls; among trees, those 
that are tall and straight; among animals, scorpions, vipers, snakes, small dry 
animals of the earth, and water animals. 
Sagittarius rules, a m o n g the organs o f the body, the buttocks, shins, and 
llBooh 333 Chapter j 
the signs of superfluity in the body and everything excessive in the body; 
among colors, rose changing to red and all colors tawny and mixed; among 
tastes, bitter; among places, gardens, places of kings and fire; among stones, 
the emerald; among minerals, lead; among animals, men and birds, snakes 
and small worms. 
Capricorn rules, among the organs of the body, the knees, the tendons 
under the knees, that is those under the kneecap and calves; among colors 
peacock blue, cardinal red, and all that are tawny and tending toward black; 
among tastes, astringent; among places, the palaces of kings, gardens and 
enclosed places, river banks and kennels, hospices and inns and places where 
captives gather and also places of the image and power of great men; among 
trees, those that are strong, such as olives, nuts, oaks, and all plants born in 
the water like reeds or iris and all plants with thorns; and among beasts, some 
animals of the water, terrestrial reptiles and serpents. 
Aquarius rules, among the organs of the body, the lower calves and heels 
and their tendons and joints; and of colors green, gray and yellow; among 
tastes, sweet; among places, places with flowing water, the sea and places 
where wine is sold; among stones, glass and similar things; among trees, those 
that are tall; among animals, man and all animals whose appearance and form 
is ugly like the devil. 
Pisces rules, among the organs of the body, the feet, nails and tendons, 
among colors, green and white and all good colors; among tastes, sharp; 
among places, hermitages, river banks, the sea, lakes of water and enclosed 
places; among stones, pearls, stones that are white and clear like crystal and 
pearls that are grown in the water; among plants, those are in the middle 
between tall and short and all plants that grow in the water; among animals, 
aquatic animals and those that are slow moving. 
These are the properties of the things ruled by the planets and signs, and 
are appropriate to them. It is necessary to pay attention to this because it is a 
foundation of magic. 
>4© 
JEfjc l^tcatrip-Jltber Kubeua COttion 
Chapter Three 
O f the figures, colors, garments, and incenses of the planets, 
as well as the colors of the faces of the signs. 
^ ^ • w i l l now speak of the colors of the planets. The color of Saturn is like 
A burned wool; that of Jupiter is green; that of Mars is red; that of the 
_ « S u n is the color of yellow gold; that ofVenus is saffron colored; that 
orMercury is like lac188 and the color of gold mixed with green; that of the 
Moon is white. 
Here are the images of the planets according to Hermes, in the book he 
sent to king Alexander, which he called the Book of the Seven Planets. What 
follows are many of the things necessary in this science. 
The image of Saturn is the image of a black man, wrapped in a green 
cloak, with the head of a dog and holding a sickle in his hand. 
The image of Jupiter is the image of a man wearing fine clothing and 
sitting on a throne. 
The image of Mars is the image of a man riding on a lion, and holding a 
large lance. 
The image of the Sun is the image of a beardless man with a beautiful 
face, having a crown on his head and a lance in his hand, and before him is 
the image of a head and a man's hand and the rest of his corpse like a horse 
with four hooves, lying reversed, that is with hands and feet upraised. 
The image ofVenus is the image of a beautiful young girl with a comb in 
her hand and in the other an apple, and her hair is flowing. 
The image of Mercury is the image of a naked man, writing and rising on 
an eagle. 
The image of the Moon is the image of a man riding a hare. 
The aforementioned sage admonished Alexander that when he wished 
to do any working with any of the planets, the working should be done 
with a body that is agreeable to the nature of the planet. If you wish to 
complete anything, consider the nature of the Ascendant at the time when 
you wish to do the work, and put on clothing that corresponds to the rising 
sign. Make the Ascendant fortunate with a benefic and the seventh house 
unfortunate with a malefic; this is because the Ascendant signifies the querent 
(and therefore it should be made fortunate in order that things should go 
vigorously forward), while the seventh house is assigned to the thing desired 
(and therefore it is appropriate that it be infortunated and debilitated in order 
for the ordained effect to be brought about). 
1 88 
Lac, the product of the lac tree, is a resin with a red-brown color. 
Boob 333 Chapter 3 
,4, 
Now follow the colors of the clothes or garments of the planets. The 
colors of the garments of Saturn are always black and it is best that they all be 
made of wool. The color of Jupiter's garments is green, and they are best made 
of silk. The color of Mars' garments is that of the flame of fire and they are 
best made of silk. The color of the Sun's garments is yellow gold and they are 
best made of silk and yellow gold. The color ofVenus' garments is rose, and 
they are best made of silk. The color of Mercury's garments is many colors 
mixed and they should preferably be silk. The color of the Moon's garments, 
finally, is shining white, and silk or linen is preferred. 
Now we will discuss the suffumigations of the planets. The suffumigation 
of Saturn is all things that smell bad, asafoetida, gum arabic, bdellium,1*1' 
hemlock and similar things; Jupiter's is all good and temperate odors and 
includes amber, lignum aloes and similar things; Mars' suffumigation 
is everything hot such as pepper and ginger; the Sun's is things that are 
temperate and good odors like nutmeg, amber and similar things; Venus' 
suffumigation is everything fragrant like rose, violets, green myrtle and similar 
things; Mercury's is mixed odors like narcissus, violets, myrtle and similar 
things; the Moon is everything that smells cold like camphor, lilies and 
similar things. Pay close attention in your work, however, to what has been 
said already. 
Now follows the colors of the faces of the signs in order.'1"' 
The color of the first face of Aries is red and it is made this way. Take one 
part of green gall, gum, and orpiment1'", pulverize them separately then mix 
them together. And from this write or paint what you wish using egg white as 
the medium. 
The color of the second face of Aries is yellow and the color of gold and 
it is made in this way. Take vitriol of iron1''2 and talc in equal parts. Pulverize 
them separately, then mix them with honey. Distill them into a gum and save 
them for your work. 
The color of the third face of Aries is white and this is how it is made. 
Take talc and white lead in equal parts. 
The first face ofTaurus has a color that is tawny and smoky and it is made 
in this way. Take soot and mix it with gum, and keep it for use. The second 
face ofTaurus is white and it is made in this way: take talc and white lead in 
equal parts. "The third face ofTaurus is black and is made from burnt wool. 
Bdellium: resin from Commiphora wightii, a relative of the myrrh tree, used 
f°r incense. 
190 
Many of the following recipes for colors use extremely toxic ingredients that 
be lethal even in very small doses. Do not attempt to use any of these recipes! 
Hie same colors can be obtained with safe synthetic pigments today. 
' 9 l , 
Orpiment: arsenic trisulphide (ArS.), an extremely toxic pigment used in 
medieval art 
1 9 2 
Vitriol of iron: iron sulphate (FeSO„), also known as shoemaker's black. 
I 42 
JEfje iHcatrijc-Jliber ftubeu* Ctntion 
The first face of Gemini has the color yellow and is similar to gold in 
color, and is made this way. Crush gall, and take the parts that are black and 
soak them in water that completely covers them and put in just enough. In 
another quantity of water and mix lac into it. Mix them together and save for 
use later. 
The second face of Gemini is red and is made in this way. Take orpiment 
and cinnabar and mix them together, and distill, and add gum in a sufficient 
quantity and save for later use. The third face of Gemini is red and we have 
said how to make it. 
The first face of Cancer has the color yellow, and how it is made we have 
already said. The second face of Cancer is also yellow and we have said how 
to make it. The third face of Cancer is black, and it is made of orpiment and 
gall in equal parts with a small amount of gum arabic. 
The first face of Leo is tawny in color, and it is made as we have said 
before. The second face of Leo is yellow of a shade similar to gold and it is 
made as we have said above. The third face of Leo is red like the color of 
apples or pomegranates and is made in this way. Take cinnabar and wash it 
many times. Then soften the dust well and mix it with green gall in water, 
add a small amount of gum arabic and lac; keep it for use. 
The first face of Virgo is a mixture of red and gold, and it is made in this 
way. Take saffron and pulverize it well and dissolve in water of green gall, mix 
well, and let it sit undisturbed for awhile, then add a small amount of gum 
arabic. 
The second face of Virgo is tawny, which is made as we have said before. 
The third face of Virgo is a mixture of yellow and red color and it is made 
in this way. Take orpiment and pulverize it well and saffron water with a 
small amount of gum arabic, and keep it for use. 
The first face of Libra is tan, which we have already said how to make. 
The second face of Libra is black, and we have said above how to make it. 
The third face of Libra is white and we have said above how to make it. 
The first face of Scorpio has the color black, the second yellow, the third, 
tan, and all of these we have already told how to make. 
The first face of Sagittarius has the color red, and we have already said 
how to make it. 
The second face of Sagittarius is yellow and it is made in this way. Take 
yellow orpiment and heat it in the fire overnight. Then mix it with white lead 
and pulverize it well, then add a small amount of gum arabic, and write with 
it. 
The third face of Sagittarius is tan, and how to make it we have already 
said. 
The first face of Aquarius has the color of red mixed with indigo, and it is 
Boob 333 Chapter 5 
,4, 
made with dragon's blood mixed with gum arabic. 
The second face of Aquarius is black and it is made in this way. Take gall, 
gum arabic, one dram of orpiment, and a half dram of parchment. Break 
them up and pulverize them and mix them together, dissolving them in egg 
white and make pills and allow them to dry. And when you wish to write, 
take one and dissolve it in water and write with it. 
The third face of Aquarius is green, and it is made with the gall of an 
animal with a small amount of gum arabic. 
The first face of Pisces has the color of light red, which is made with 
white lead pulverized with a small amount of cinnabar1'0 and gum arabic. 
The second face of Pisces is tawny and is made from the burnt bark of 
tamarisk mixed with a small amount of gum arabic. The third face of Pisces is 
red and we have already said how it is made. 
Chapter Four 
W h y the secrets of this science may not be 
understood except a little at a time 
he ancient sages who have spoken of the occult sciences and magic1''1 
in their books wrote them as obscurely as they could, so that no 
one would be able to gain any benefit from them, except by means 
of wisdom and continual study and practice in them. This chapter is placed 
here, as though by mistake, in order to make a modest demonstration of this. 
Chapter Five 
n which is demonstrated the virtue proper to animals and noteworthy 
things necessary in this science, and how the spirits of the planets are 
attracted by figures and suffumigations 
ow that the higher properties of every planet in the inferior tribes, 
that is, animals, plants, and minerals, have been described, we 
shall now speak of the same tribes in another way. Among them, 
1 C i n n a b a r : 
mercuric sulfide (HgS), a poisonous ore of mercury. 
' 
Magicis scienciis et nigromancia in the original. 
'44 
Kfyz i?icatnF'Jlfljcr lttnbeu0 (Litton 
the animals are more noble, and among these nobler forms, humanity is 
distinguished, in that it attains a nobler degree of reflection. Some animals 
have only one sense, such as conches, alaph omidie and the like, while others 
have two, three, four, five, or even ten. Humanity has ten manifest senses and 
five hidden ones, which this book will now discuss. 
The forms of animals are diverse, as may be seen by reviewing the 
different kinds of animals. Just as a human being is an animal intermediate 
between separated'1'' celestial spirits and beasts, fish are intermediate between 
beasts and birds, conches are intermediate between sensitive and insensitive 
beings, as they only have two senses1''6—and this is because of the terrestrial 
nature that binds them, and makes them almost similar in nature to plants. 
From this it is clear that the more an animal has of a given element, the more 
the animal will be made of that element's nature. 
Man is the noblest of animals, since in his body the elements are 
mutually related as they ought to be, while other animals may be more easily 
equated to their combinations of elements. One of the elements is proper 
to each animal, who can never be separated from it, as birds can never be 
separated from air or fishes from water, and devils are never separated from 
the perpetual fire that is called "infernal," while the fire that is sensed and 
perceived by our senses is properly assigned to the animal called "salamander," 
which resembles a mouse made of fire. Heavy animals, on account of their 
weight, are never separated from earth. 
Here we will answer a certain unspoken question, that is, in what 
way devils exist in fire. I say that man is called a lesser world, and when 
comparing him with the greater, one may almost say that whatever is 
contained in the greater world may be found virtually in the lesser. Thus if 
devils exist in the greater world, they ought in a certain sense to be found in 
effect in the lesser. This happens in this way: when the irascible appetite197 
is stirred up in man, it is inflamed immoderately and he becomes angry and 
utterly furious, and then becomes a devil in all his actions. By a certain 
similitude we can say that devils exist in fire, that is, they exist in the rising 
fire of anger in man, from which the deeds of a devil follow. When the will 
of that man has the temperament it ought to have, in turn, it is governed by 
reason and virtue, and he becomes an angel. We can therefore truly say that 
devils exist in the greater world just as they do in this lesser one. 
Now, however, we return to our theme. I say that the aforementioned 
195 
"Separated," that is, from physical bodies and the world of matter. 
196 
The contradiction between this and the previous paragraph is in the 
original. 
197 
Anger in medieval psychology is one of the appetites, the irrational drives 
that the wise control, and that controlthe unwise. It corresponds to fire and the 
choleric humor. 
Booh 333 Chapter 5 
'45 
division of three kinds in respect to the planets, and their works in the 
aforesaid sciences according to the Chaldeans, Nabateans, Egyptians, Greeks, 
Turks, and Hindus, come from the combining of parts that are of the same 
kind, and this may be accomplished by means of suffumigations, garments, 
food, and odors. In this way they made truly great marvels, as we indeed 
discover in their books. In this way they made confections with which, by 
the addition of the powers of the stars, they worked with the air until it was 
mingled with the powers of fire, until these reached this world, and thereby 
the effect or desire was accomplished. 
The air is a body without which other bodies can have very little life, 
since it is the medium by which bodies, or influences, or the effects of the 
planets, may be disposed by the will acting by a mixture of its own air with 
the air in general. This may be done by suffumigations, which take the place 
of the members of the human body, and these suffumigations are composed 
of woods and things and other kinds. By these suffumigations the spirits 
of men are moved toward their desires. In this way magical workings have 
marvelous and manifest effects. 
I have read a certain book, titled "The Divider of Sciences and Revealer 
of Secrets," in which this was written. It recounted a story that seems 
trustworthy to me, which was mentioned in the land of Foracen as something 
else which came from India and was introduced to this science from there, 
but when the book discussed disputes about doubtful matters, it questioned 
whether it belonged to this science. It said, though, that this was clearly 
proven. 
"There was in that land a certain girl whom everyone considered very 
beautiful. One said that he could make her come to my dwelling. I asked 
him to make her come as he promised, and I did this for two reasons, both 
for the love of knowledge, and also because I desired the girl; and I asked him 
also to do the working in my presence. At once, by suspending an astrolabe 
and finding the altitude of the Sun, he determined the ascendant and also set 
out the twelve houses.''"1 He found that Aries, which is ruled by Mars, was 
rising, and Libra, which is ruled by Venus, was in the seventh house. I asked 
him what this meant, and he said that the ascendant and seventh house are 
the houses corresponding to the request I had made. Mars and Venus being 
placed in the chart where they were, he explained that when they regarded 
one another in a trine aspect, my intention would be accomplished. He 
found that the aspect between them would be perfected in forty days, and 
he told me that in the aforesaid forty days from the day in which I asked my 
'98 
This was standard medieval astrological practice. Since the position of the 
Sun in the zodiac can be easily tracked in tables, the position oh the Sun in the sky at 
any moment allowed the medieval astrologer to calculate the ascendant and the house 
cusps. 
14 6 
2D&e Picatrir-iLiber Kubeu* dftttton 
question, I would in fact gain my desire. 
"At once he took a little piece of diamond, powdered it finely, and mixed 
it with an equal amount of gum ammoniac,'1" and from this mixture he 
made an image in my likeness. He also took dry sycamore and powdered 
it finely, mixed it with wax, and from this made an image of the beautiful 
girl, and dressed it in clothing like hers. Then he took a new jug and in it 
put seven rods or sticks (that is, twigs of myrtle, willow, pomegranate, apple, 
cottonwood, sycamore, and laurel) and arranged these in the middle of the 
jug, four below and three above, placed crosswise. 
"Then he put in the image made in my name, and then he put the image 
of the girl into the same jug. As he did this, he noted when Venus would be 
opposing Mars, and when Mars would be strengthened by the fortunes. He 
sealed the jug, and opened it again every day in the hour in which he put the 
aforementioned things into it. At the end of the forty days, when the lord 
of the ascendant regarded the lord of the seventh house by trine aspect, he 
opened the jug again and placed the images so that each regarded the other, 
that is, face to face. Then he sealed the jug and gave it to me to bury under 
the hearth in which there was ordinarily a fire, and while burying it in the 
gravel, told me to say one word from India, which he interpreted to me and 
told to me as we will explain later on. 
"Then, when the working was complete, he took out the jug and opened 
it, and took the images out of it. Then the aforesaid girl came to the door of 
my house, and she stayed with me for ten days. At the end of the ten days, he 
said I should do the aforesaid. 'When my promise to you is fulfilled,' he said, 
T think it better that we free the girl, and restore her to liberty unharmed.' 
I agreed to this with a good will, and took the two images that had been 
buried. Then, taking powdered chaste tree2"" and mixing it into wax, he made 
candles from it and burned them on the hearth. 
"When they were entirely burnt, he took the images from their burial 
place, divided them from one another, and threw one of them in one 
direction and the other in the other, saying another word which I shall teach 
later. He did all this to show his knowledge to me. When this was done, we 
saw the girl's memory vanish, and she stood stupefied like a sleepwalker. She 
then said to me, 'What did you want to say to me?' and, taking flight, left the 
house. 
This was one of the great marvels that I have seen of this science in 
the course of my life. I have recounted the foregoing in order to show 
199 
Gum ammoniac: this is the gum of Dorema ammoniacum, a Middle 
Eastern herb. 
200 
Chaste tree: Vitex agnus-castus, a tree whose leaves were used in medieval 
medicine. 
Boob 47 Chapter 12 
127 
the wonders of this science and the magnitude of its effects so that, as this 
working was done with an aspect of the aforementioned planets, and their 
positions, aspects, ascensions, departures from their houses, the materials of 
which the images were compounded, suffumigations, and everything else was 
related to the work, so you in your own workings should do likewise, so that 
everything in them should correspond and you will proceed to your goal with 
the proper competence. In this way you will be able to attain the result you 
desire, as the wise have written. 
Now, however, I will begin to treat of those things which are needful for 
working with the planetary spirits, as well as those of the stars, and generally 
of those things that accompany images, so that the image receives the virtues 
of the planet: for example, suffumigations, and from what foods you should 
abstain while working, so that the work is completed more swiftly. I tell you, 
my dear student, that I have composed this book with great labor and study, 
bringing together a very great number of the books of the ancient sages, 
considering and contemplating their opinions, and writing down their true 
conclusions and proven results, until I had studied word by word 224 books 
of my predecessors, the ancient sages, and from all these, gathering the flowers 
and lilies thereof,2'" I composed this book, devoting six years altogether to this 
labor. 
Before writing the passage quoted above, I put forward aphorisms that 
were noteworthy and truly worth observing. The reception of the spirits of 
the planets, however, according to the opinion of the ancients, is that which 
follows. It is first necessary to know the nature of the planets, what receives 
their powers, the spirits you desire to summon, and their powers, so as to 
combine these in the figure or image you wish to use, and the natures of those 
things that correspond to the planet which were discussed earlier, that is, its 
colors, foods, perfumes, and incenses. Then you should diligently direct your 
efforts, so that the color of the surface of the body of the image be a similar 
color to that of the planet you have chosen, that the perfume be among its 
perfumes, and the colors of the garments of the image and the magician be 
colors that correspond to the same planet; and the suffumigations be odors 
corresponding to that planet. The body of the magician should also be of the 
nature of the planet; that is, let it be fed with foods assigned to the planet, 
and clothed accordingly, so that the body of the magician himself should 
thereby be maintained in the complexion2"2 of the planet. 
If it happens that such meals are contrary to your own nature, you should 
201 
A popular medieval image; collections of excerpts from books were called 
florilegia, literally "gathering of flowers." 
202 
In medieval medical theory, "complexion" was the technical term for the 
balance of humors in the body. 
148 
C&e Watm-Wbtt Kubeua coition 
begin by eating foods that are moderate and temperate, and little by little 
proceed to eat the planetary foods, so that your stomach becomes accustomed 
to it.203 In this way you may strengthen your appetite so that your body may 
be governed and nourished by the food. When the body is to be governed in 
this way, however, see what part of the Zodiacal signs the planet is in, and also 
that its rays are projected in a straight line to the Earth, and are not broken 
off by the rays of another contrary planet, but are poured directly down onto 
the Earth, being far from any impediment. 
Then you should take some of the metal attributed to the planet, and 
from it cast a cross, doing this when the heavens are appropriately arranged; 
and set up the cross on two feet.21"1 Then combine it with a figure or image 
appropriate to your intention and the planetary spirit. For example, if you 
wish to make an image for battles or to conquer and terrify enemies, join the 
cross to the image of a lion or a snake. If you wish to work in order to flee 
and escape, combine the cross with the image of a bird. Ifyour working is 
for the increase of riches, power, official position, or social standing, combine 
the cross with the image of a man sitting on a throne. Do the same thing, 
following these examples, in all your requests, combining the cross with a 
figure appropriate to your desire. If you wish someone to be obedient to 
your desire and not disobey your precepts, make the image out of a stone 
that is of a nature appropriate to the planet that has great power in the radix 
of his nativity and in his ascendant. Make that image in the hour of the 
same planet, and the planet that is dominant in the nativity should not be 
opposing, or in the same sign as, or in any aspect to, any planet of a nature 
contrary to it. If you would make the aforesaid perfect, set up the figure so 
that it is the erectrix of another prime figure.20' 
The reason why we have said that this figure should be made in the form 
of a cross is for reasons already given, that is, that the powers of all things are 
collected in figures that accord with the qualities that are in them, and flee 
from their contraries. We seek the powers of a planetary spirit in order that it 
may be united with a figure, but we do not know the form of the spirit, nor 
are we able to attain to that knowledge experimentally except in the form of a 
human being, an animal, or some other thing. 
It may be concluded from this that all the aforementioned virtue 
manifests most completely in figures. Therefore, we see all the figures and 
forms of trees and plants to be diverse in their shapes, just as the forms of 
animals are, and likewise minerals. As we have no way to perceive the proper 
203 
This is standard medieval medical advice. 
204 
What follows makes it clear that this cross has equal arms, and is meant to 
stand upright 011 two legs like a letter X. 
205 
That is, choose the time and date when you set up the figure by means of 
electional astrology so that it furthers your intention. 
Boob 151 Chapter 12 
127 
forms of the planetary spirits, the ancient masters of this art chose the cross 
as a universal figure for them. This is because every body is perceived by its 
surfaces, and the surfaces of forms have length and breadth, and the proper 
figure of length and breadth is found in the cross. Thus we say that this shape 
has a universal magistery in these workings, and is as it were a receptacle for 
the powers of the planetary spirits insofar as the other figure does not diverge 
from them. This is one of the secrets of this art.21"' 
Furthermore, all human beings are set beneath the seven planetary circles. 
When the virtue of the planetary spirits is united with the figure of the cross, 
then the working has virtue and power over whatever other figure stands with 
it, so that if the other figure is in the shape of a man, its power will be poured 
out upon men, and likewise if it is shaped as some other animal. 
When you make the figures in this way, however, you should also make a 
thurible2"7 out of the same metal of which the cross is made, in such a manner 
and form as to be wholly enclosed except at its upper end, in which there 
should be an opening so that the smoke is able to get out through it; nor 
should the smoke of the incense be able to rise upward by any other route. 
Besides this, you should have a house set aside and assigned to this work, into 
which if at all possible only those taking part in the working may enter, and 
they only at the time of the working. This house should have a place open to 
the sky; it should be strewn with herbs of the planet ruling the working, and 
in it should be nothing but these herbs. 
Then you should take suffumigations of the nature of the same planet, 
which you will burn in the thurible. Set up the cross above the thurible, so 
that the rising smoke goes up toward the underside of the cross and then 
flows above the upper side. If this is done, and the preceding instructions are 
diligently followed, the smoke of the suffumigation reaches the sphere of the 
signs2"8 entirely by straight lines, nor will the lines of other planets resisting 
that planet cut it off with their rays. Ifyour work will be on this inferior 
Earth, and the virtue of the planet descends to the Earth by its own proper 
lines, then you will have what you desire. 
Whoever intends to labor in this science, however, must first learn and 
understand what general and specific significations belong to each of the 
planetary powers, and how one power overcomes another. Excellence in the 
working just described comes from choosing a planet for your working that 
has a general potency, and not combining it with another planet that has a 
206 
This remarkable passage seems to echo Gnostic teachings about the cross 
°r stauros, the instrument by which Jesus triumphed over the archons of the seven 
planets. 
207 
Thurible: an incense burner. 
208 
That is, the incense rises straight through the celestial spheres to the sphere 
of the Zodiac, following the descending rays of the planer ruling the operation. 
'5° 
ITIje l?tcatnj:-3libcr Kiibeu* edition 
particular potency. You should always work with the spirit and influence of 
that planet that has the more general potency. Furthermore, if the planet that 
has a general potency is the dispositor of the nativity of the magician, or the 
almuten ruling it, your work will be even more complete. 
A sage has said that there is no other way or method to unite incorporeal 
spirits with corporeal spirits except by first making contact with the higher 
of the two; and this is the secret of this art. Nonetheless, whoever performs 
the foregoing without error will be able to achieve his desire. The sage Aaron 
said that one who knows his own nativity is able to know the hour of the 
conjunction of his own spirit and body, and therefore the planet ruling his 
nativity, and by this knowledge knows the planet that effected the union of 
spirit and body in his own generation. If that planet is unfortunate, it will 
make him unfortunate, while if it is fortunate, on the other hand, it will make 
him fortunate. 
Chapter Six 
The magistery of drawing planetary spirits with natural things, and 
what a magical image is and how it can have this power 
f 
othing in this science can be perfected unless the virtue and 
^ u ^/^disposition of the planets are inclined toward it by their own 
^ J 
^^nature. This is what Aristotle says, in the Book ofAntimaquis,1"' 
wher" he says: Perfect Nature fortifies those who philosophize, and 
strengthens their intellect and their wisdom, so that in all their works they 
may quickly attain fulfillment. 
Everything belonging to this science, however, the wise concealed 
according to their degree, so that no one except a philosopher would be able 
to uncover it. They taught all knowledge and the subtleties of philosophy 
to their disciples before revealing to them the work of the spirits of Perfect 
Nature. They gave to the spirits of Perfect Nature these four names: Meegius, 
Betzahuech, Vacdez, Nufeneguediz, which are the four parts of the spirits of 
Perfect Nature named above. When those sages wished to speak about Perfect 
Nature, they called them by these four names, which signify the powers of 
Perfect Nature. 
Hermes, however, said: When I wished to understand and draw forth the 
209 
This is the Kitnb al-Istamatis or Liber Antimaquis, one of many medieval 
magical texts assigned to Aristotle, which is quoted repeatedly in the following 
chapters. 
Boob 333 Chapter 153 
,4, 
secrets of the workings of the world and of its qualities, I put myself above a 
certain pit that was very deep and dark, from which a certain impetuous wind 
blew; nor was I able to see anything in the pit, on account of its obscurity. If 
1 put a lit candle in it, straightway it was extinguished by the wind. 
Then there appeared to me in a dream a beautiful man of imperial 
authority, who spoke to me as follows: "Put that lit candle in a lantern of 
glass, and the impetuosity of the wind will not extinguish it. You should 
lower the lantern into the pit, in the middle of which you should dig; thence 
you may draw forth an image by which, when you have drawn it forth, the 
wind from the pit will be extinguished, and then you will be able to hold 
the light there. Then you should dig in the four corners of the pit, and from 
there you may draw out the secrets of the world and of Perfect Nature, and its 
qualities, and the generation of all things." 
I asked him who he was, and he replied: "I am Perfect Nature;21" if you 
wish to speak to me, call me by my proper name, and I will answer you." I 
asked him them by what name he was called, and he answered me, saying, 
"By the four names mentioned above I am named and called." I asked him 
next at what times I should call him, and how I should make the invocation. 
He said: "When the Moon is in the first degree of Aries, be it by day 
or by night, whenever you wish, go into a house that is clean and splendid, 
in one corner of which you should put a raised table on the floor, toward 
the eastern side. Take four pitchers (each of which should have a capacity 
around one pint). Into one of them put cow's butter, into the second nut 
oil, into the third almond oil, and into the fourth sesame oil. Then take 
four more pitchers of the same size, and pour wine into them. Then make a 
composition of nut oil, butter, honey, and sugar. Take the eight pitchers and 
the mixture you have made, and a glass vessel; put this latter in the center of 
the table, and put the composition you have made into it. 
"Next put the four pitchers full of wine at the four quarters of the table, 
arranging them in the following way: the first pitcher in the east, the second 
in the west, the third in the south, and the fourth in the north. Then take the 
other four pitchers; first put the one full of almond oil to the east, then the 
one full of nut oil to the west; the one full of butter goes to the south, and the 
one full of sesame oil to the north. Then take a burning candle and put it in 
the midst of the table. Then take two thuribles full of burning charcoal, into 
one of which you shall put frankincense and mastic, and into the other aloes 
2 
This entire passage is reminiscent of the Poemandres, the first dialogue of 
the Corpus Hermeticum, in which Hermes has a conversation with a similar spiritual 
,c'ng- The ritual that follows is of great interest; it seems to bridge the gap between 
classical rituals for evoking a guardian spirit, of the sort found in the Graeco-Egyptian 
nwgical papyri, and early modern rituals for the same purpose such as the famous 
Abramehn working. 
I52 
C&e ¥HcatrtF-JLlber Utibeu * edition 
wood. 
"When all this is done, stand upright on your feet facing the east, and 
invoke the four aforementioned names seven times. When you have invoked 
them seven times, speak as follows: 
"T call to you, O strong, potent, and exalted spirit, because from you 
proceed the knowledge of the wise and the understanding of the intellect, 
and by your virtue the desires of the wise are accomplished, that you may 
respond to me, and be present with me, and unite with me your powers and 
the virtues that accompany you, and strengthen me with your knowledge 
so that I may understand that which I do not understand, and know that of 
which I am ignorant, and see that which 1 do not see; and remove from me all 
blindness, turpitude, forgetfulness and infirmity; and lift me up to the degree 
of the ancient sages (those, indeed, whose hearts were filled with knowledge, 
wisdom, understanding, and cognition), and affix the aforesaid things in my 
heart, so that my heart may be made like the hearts of the ancient sages.'" He 
then said: "And when you have done the foregoing working in the aforesaid 
way, you will see me." 
This working is described in the Book of Antimaquis. The ancient sages 
used to perform this working every year for the sake of their spirits, so that 
they might put in order their Perfect Natures. When this was done, they used 
to feast together with their friends on whatever on the table was nearest to 
them. 
Aristotle said furthermore that each sage had his proper virtue infused 
into him by exalted spirits, by whose powers their senses were closed, their 
intellects opened, and sciences were revealed to them. This virtue was 
conjoined with the virtue of the planet ruling the radix of the nativity, so that 
the virtue thus co-created in them strengthened them and gave intelligence to 
them. These same ancient sages and kings used to do this working and pray 
this prayer with the four names given above, by which they helped themselves 
in their knowledge and understanding, and the increase of their business and 
possessions, and guarded themselves from the plots of their enemies, and did 
many other things. 
Aristotle said that the first who worked with images, and the one to 
whom spirits first appeared, was Caraphzebiz. He it was who first discovered 
the magical art, and spirits appeared first to him, performing wonders, and 
opening Perfect Nature to his knowledge, and made him understand that 
same secret nature and sciences. His familiar spirit said to him: I will remain 
with you, but do not reveal me to others or speak of me, and make sacrifices 
in my name. He became a sage by working with the spirits, and helped 
himself by their powers and by workings in which they took part. 
From that sage Caraphzebiz down to another sage named Amenus (who 
)15oob 333 Chapter 6 
>5? 
was the second to work with spirits and magical operations) 1260 years 
passed by. This sage, when he taught, used to offer this advice, that any sage 
who wanted to work magic, and preserve himself with the powers of the 
spirits, ought strictly to give up all cares and all other sciences beside this one, 
because when all the senses and the mind, and all contemplations about other 
things, are strictly turned to magic, it may be acquired with ease; and since 
many assiduous contemplations are appropriate to this science of magic, the 
magician must wrap himself in these, rather than being wrapped around any 
other things. 
Tintinz the Greek said the same thing in the beginning of his book, that 
one who desires to perform this work ought to abandon all intention and 
contemplation concerning other things, because the root and foundation of 
all these workings consists of contemplations. Aristotle said that an image is 
called an image for this reason, that the powers of spirits are conjoined to it;2" 
for contemplation goes into anything in which the virtue consists of a hidden 
spirit. The powers of the spirits are fourfold: that is, the senses, which are 
said to be joined to the world; the spirit of things, to which spirit is attracted; 
the spirit of perfect, sane, and unbroken contemplation; and the spirit by 
which works are done by the hands. These three spirits in matter, which exist 
in intention and effect, are coadunated in perfect contemplation with the 
senses, which we have said are joined to the world. 
The senses attract rays and bring them to those things toward which 
they are directed, like a mirror that is raised up into the light of the Sun, and 
reflects his rays into the shadows to either side; it receives the Sun's rays from 
his light, and projects them into shadowy places; and those shadowy places 
become bright and illuminated, nor is the Sun's light diminished thereby. This 
is how the three spirits named above work, when the spirits of motion and 
rest are joined to the superior world while in contact with the senses; they 
attract the powers of the spirits of the superior world, and pour them out 
upon matter. This is the foundation of images, and why they are given that 
name. 
Socrates said that Perfect Nature is the Sun of the wise and its root is 
light. Certain people inquired of Hermes the sage, asking: "With what are 
science and philosophy joined?" He answered, "With Perfect Nature." They 
asked again, saying, "What is the root of science and philosophy?" He said, 
Perfect Nature." Then they questioned him more closely: "What is the 
key by which science and philosophy are opened?" He answered, "Perfect 
Nature." They then asked of him, "What is Perfect Nature?" He answered, 
"Perfect Nature is the spirit of the philosopher or sage linked to the planet 
211 
This seems to be suggesting that the Latin word ymago, "image," comes 
from in ago, "I act in it"—a standard kind of medieval analysis. 
'54 
jED&e Picatrip-Jlibcr Kubeufi CDitlon 
that governs him. This is that which opens the closed places of knowledge, 
and by which is understood that which cannot otherwise be understood at all, 
and from which workings proceed naturally both in sleep and in waking." 
Thus it is clear from the foregoing that Perfect Nature acts in the sage or 
philosopher as a teacher toward a student, teaching the latter first in simple 
and easy matters, and then proceeding step by step to greater and more 
difficult ones, until the student is perfect in knowledge. When Perfect Nature 
works in this way, according to its own virtue and influence, the intellect of 
the philosopher is disposed according to his natural inclination. You should 
understand this, committing it to memory, because from the foregoing it may 
be concluded that it is impossible for anybody to attain this science except 
those who are naturally inclined to it, both by their own virtue and by the 
disposition of the planet ruling in their nativity. 
Chapter Seven 
Attracting the virtues of the planets, and how we may speak with 
them, and how their influences are divided among planets, figures, 
sacrifices, prayers, suffumigations, and propositions; and the state 
of the heavens necessary to each planet 
certain sage, Athabary by name, said this about the work of the sages 
in receiving the powers of the planets, according to the observances 
found in the ancient books of magical operations. When you desire 
to speak with any planet or ask it for anything that you need, first and above 
all else, purify your will and your faith in God, and beware especially that 
you believe in no other; then cleanse your body and your garments of all dirt. 
Then determine the nature of the planet to which your petition corresponds. 
When you wish to address the planet to which your petition properly belongs, 
dress in clothing dyed the color of that planet, and suffumigate yourself 
with its suffumigation, and pray its prayer. Do all this when the planet 
is established in its dignities and called superior in its dispositions, for by 
observing these things, what you desire will come to pass. 
Here we will briefly repeat the petitions proper to each planet. Ask 
Saturn in petitions concerning old people or generous men, senators212 
and rulers of cities, hermits, those who labor in the earth, restoration of 
citizenship and inheritance, distinguished men, farmers, builders of buildings, 
212 
Many cities in the medieval Middle East were governed by city senates, as 
in Roman rimes. 
Boob 55 Chapter 12 127 
servants, thieves, fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers. If you find 
yourself in contemplation and sorrow, or in melancholy213 or grave illness, 
in anything just named, or in any thing that has already been mentioned as 
belonging to Saturn, and you ask for something that belongs to his nature, 
you may seek it from him in the manner we describe below, and you may 
also help yourself in your petition by means of Jupiter.214 The essence of all 
these petitions is that you should not seek anything from any planet unless it 
belongs to his dominion. 
Seek from Jupiter all that belongs to his portion, such as petitions 
concerning sublime men, the powerful, prelates, sages, preachers of religion, 
judges, virtuous men, interpreters of dreams, hermits, philosophers, kings, 
their sons, the children of their sons, soldier, and cousins; and petitions for 
peace and profit; and anything similar may be sought from him. 
Seek from Mars what is consistent with his nature, such as petitions 
against soldiers, officials, fighters, and those who busy themselves with warlike 
acts; and on behalf of friends of kings, and those who destroy homes and 
citizens, and do evil to humanity, killers, executioners, those who work with 
fire or in places such as stables, litigators, shepherds, thieves, companions 
on the road, liars, traitors, and the like. Similar, ask him concerning 
infirmities of the body from the groin downwards, and also for phlebotomy,21' 
accumulation of gas, and the like. In these latter petitions you may also help 
yourself with Venus, for the nature ofVenus dissolves what is closed up by 
Mars, and repairs what he damages. 
Seek from the Sun those petitions that are appropriate to him, such as 
petitions against kings, the sons of warriors and kings, exalted people who 
delight in justice and truth and abhor falsehood and violence, desirous of 
good reputation and seeking popular acclaim, officials, clergy, physicians, 
philosophers, exalted people who are humble, perceptive and magnanimous, 
older brothers, fathers, and the like. 
Seek from Venus all things that pertain to her, such as petitions of 
women, boys, and girls, daughters, and generally everything pertaining to the 
love of women and carnal copulation with them, art, vocal and instrumental 
music, telling jokes, and all those who give themselves over to worldly 
pleasures, those who engage in vices, male and female servants, brides and 
grooms, mothers, friends, sisters, and all those similar to them, and in these 
petitions you may also help yourself with Mars. 
Seek from Mercury petitions appropriate to notaries, scribes, 
213 
Melancholia corresponds to the modern concept of depression. 
214 
While Saturn rules sorrow, melancholy and the like, Jupiter counteracts 
them, and the powers of Jupiter may therefore be used to balance an excess of 
Saturnine influence. 
215 
Bloodletting for medical reasons. 
>5* 
jGT&e Picatnj^Hlfber Hubeufl flftrttton 
arithmeticians, geometers, astrologers, grammarians, lecturers, philosophers, 
rhetoricians, poets, sons of kings, secretaries of kings, halfbreeds, merchants, 
minstrels, lawyers, servants, boys, girls, younger brothers, painters, designers, 
and those similar to them. 
Seek from the Moon all things pertaining to her and attributed to her 
nature, such as those who petition kings, urban and rural tenants, halfbreeds, 
messengers sent by land or sea, farm laborers, plowmen, geometricians, 
stewards, portraitists, mariners and all those who do work pertaining to water, 
the populace in general, geomancers, fiancees, the wives of kings, youths 
without beards, and the like. 
Next I have determined to write the natures of each of the planets and 
the things appropriate to them, and what each of them signifies. This begins 
with Saturn, as before. Saturn is cold and dry, an infortune, destructive, the 
source of bad and foul odors, proud and a traitor because, when he makes any 
promise, he betrays it. He signifies farmers, streams, those who work in the 
earth, controversies, great and long journeys, great and enduring enmities, 
bringing evils, battles and all things unwanted, and the power to make and 
work. True speech, hope, blackness, age, buildings, fear, great thoughts, cares, 
angers, betrayals, sorrows, anguish, death, inheritances, orphans, old places, 
appraisals, proper elocution, secret sciences, secret meanings, and profound 
knowledge: he signifies all the foregoing when he is direct in his motion. 
When he is retrograde, however, he signifies misfortune, debilities or 
infirmities, prisons and evils suffered in all things, and if he enters into aspect 
with any other planet, he weakens it and damages all the qualities of the other 
planet. If he is retrograde and you ask him for something, what you seek will 
come about with delays and miseries and great labor. If he is retrograde in 
any of his dignities, his maledictions are augmented and increased; while if he 
rises in his powers and dignities, then he will be easier and gentler. 
Jupiter is warm and moist, temperate and fortunate (whence he is called 
the Greater Fortune), and follows Saturn in the order of the planets. He 
signifies things that are subtly made, the bodies of animals, beginnings, the 
growth of animals, right judgment, collegiality and equality in all things, 
perception, gentleness, true speech, truth, right belief, faithfulness, chastity, 
honor, gratitude, eloquence, the sustenance of good words, good perception 
and intelligence, the sciences, philosophy, teaching, things obtained by correct 
reasoning and peace, honor received from the people, improvement in all 
one's business, fulfillment of petitions, the will of kings, delighting in riches 
and accumulating them, gentleness,216 liberality, sacrifices, helpers of people 
in all things and all works, delighting in crowds and all crowded places, 
benefactors of humanity, piety, following and upholding the law in all things, 
216 
This repetition is in the original, as are those in the lists that follow. 
Boob 57 Chapter 12 127 
delighting in places of the faithful, people of honest speech, decent ornament, 
beauty, joy, laughter and much conversation, speaking well and gladly, benign 
faces, as well as lovers of the good and those who abhor evil, preachers of 
good words and those who perform all good deeds and avoid bad ones. 
Mars is hot and dry, an infortune, destructive, and the cause of evils. He 
signifies destruction, wicked deeds, depopulation of homes and cities, drying 
up and damming of rivers, fire, combustion, controversies, blood, all passions 
while they are being felt, bad and distorted judgment, oppressions, sorrows, 
manslaughter and all manner of destruction, demolition, lawsuits, wars, 
battles, terrors, discord between people, anxieties and miseries, pain, wounds, 
prisons, misery, escape, litigation, stupidity, treacheries, and all things that are 
cursed without sense or reason—ordinary happiness, lying, ungratefulness, 
ordinary life, shame, encounters on the roads, landlessness and lack of solace, 
discords, sharpness and angers, doing things that are prohibited by the laws, 
fear, ordinary legalities, betrayals, all kinds of false promises and assessments, 
wicked deeds involving copulation with women in forbidden ways, such as 
those who desire beasts and other animals and strange women, infanticide 
and destroying living things and abortion, robbery, treasons and deceptions, 
all manner of frauds, feeling miserable, brooding, thefts of clothing and shoes, 
highway robbery, those who break walls by night,-r those who break down 
doors, and evil deeds of every kinds, as well as all things remote from truth 
and lawfulness. 
The Sun is hot and dry, and of mixed good and ill in his influence; he 
repairs and destroys, and brings both good and evil; he is both a fortune and 
an infortune. He signifies and reveals perception and intellect, exaltations 
and high offices, but without fear, and indeed easily, makes men to triumph 
over their enemies and easily inflict violent deaths on them; he shows those 
who give great gifts to friends (that is, to those to whom they are appropriate 
and merited); he destroys those who send many, which are cut off all together, 
distributes good things and otherwise, and causes both good and evil; 
those who observe the law, and those who keep promises; to all people, he 
gives delight in good and pleasant things, great eloquence and giving ready 
responses in all things; he increases the appetite for amassing wealth, and for 
people to desire good things, a good reputation in the mouths of the people, 
and high positions and official posts, making all legality and goodness, and 
all things that are proper for kings and great men in the world and the mode 
of living that is necessary to them, as well as all exalted and ornate work with 
minerals, and making the crowns of kings and sublime things, and making 
large books. 
217 
A standard way to break into a house in the medieval Middle East was to 
apply hammer and chisel to masonry walls at night. 
.$8 
Kty l^icatrir-iLOttr Uubeiw GKution 
Venus is cold and moist, and a fortune. She signifies cleanliness, 
splendor, preciousness, word games, delight in music, joy, adornments, 
laughter, pictures, beauty, loveliness, playing music by the voice or stringed 
instruments; delighting in marriage, desiring spices and things that have good 
odors; sending dreams; provoking games of chess and dice; desiring to lie 
with women and to fall in love with them and receiving promises from them; 
desiring to appear beautiful, loving liberty, magnanimity of heart, and joy. 
She abhors anger, brawling, vengeance, and lawsuits; she desires to serve the 
desires and wills of friends concerning the world's opinion; tends toward false 
promises; is inclined to cupidity; desires to drink much; incessantly desires 
much copulation, and of shameful kinds, and to do it in inappropriate places, 
as women are accustomed to do with one another; delighting in animals 
and children and in making them good; making things equal; delighting in 
merchants and living with them and being loved by their women; and that 
they may be delighted by men. When she is well received, she plays a part in 
the making of crowns, building stables and working in stone, having sweet 
speech, disdaining the world and having no fear of it; sustaining people 
so that neither anger, strife, or discord can be felt by them; it designates a 
weak heart and a weak will in lawsuits and combat, and signifies desire for 
all beautiful combinations of things which may be in conformity with the 
will; making colors and laboring diligently in skills involving them; selling 
merchandise, spices, and prayers; those who observe the religious law; and 
those who adhere to sciences and philosophies of forbidden kinds. 
Mercury is changeable, permuting himself from one nature to another, 
and receives the nature of the other planets—that is, he is benefic with 
benefic planets and malefic with malefic ones. He signifies perception and 
the rational intellect, fine eloquence, powerful and profound understanding 
of things, good intelligence, good memory, good perception, and an agile 
mind apt to learn sciences; those who labor in science and philosophy; 
understanding how things will happen; arithmeticians, geometers, astrologers, 
geomancers, magicians, augurs, scribes, grammarians, and smooth talkers; 
ready understanding of the petitions of the wise, those who labor in sciences 
and who desire to be exalted by those same sciences; those who want to make 
books, verses, and rhymes; those who write books, calculations and sciences; 
those who want to know the secrets of wisdom; expounders of philosophies; 
merciful and gentle people, and those who love sensation and pleasure; 
those who waste and destroy their wealth; merchandise; those who buy and 
sell things; having a part in the judgments and reasonings of people; the 
astute and deceptive; those who contemplate wickedness in their minds and 
keep these thoughts hidden; liars and makers of false instruments; fearful 
of enemies, swift in all works, flitting from the things of one profession to 
51Boob 333 Chapter 7 
'59 
those of another; busying himself in everything; daring in all works that can 
be done by subtlety, and desiring to do great things; those who become rich; 
supporters of their friends and the people who mislead them to illicit ends. 
The Moon is cold and moist. She signifies the beginning of works, great 
cogitations about things, good perception and motion, the best discussions 
in councils, utterances well spoken, daring in all things; fortunate concerning 
food that is necessary or desirable; good manners with people; gracious and 
quick in all actions, clean, moving quickly toward what is desired; having 
healthy and clear intentions toward people; a great appetite for eating, but a 
small one for sex and delights with women; turning away from evil so that 
one may be well spoken of by people; delighting in happy and beautiful 
things; thoroughly studying high sciences such as astrology, magic, and other 
secret sciences; faithful spouses, desiring to produce sons and nephews, and 
to make the society and home of their parents better; loved and honored by 
people, abhorring iniquity, just in all her works, and according to one of her 
qualities she signifies oblivion and necessity. 
How to speak with Saturn. When you want to speak with Saturn and 
ask him for whatever you wish, you must wait until he enters into good 
condition, of which the best is when he is in Libra, which is his exaltation, 
next in Aquarius, which is the house of his rejoicing, and last in Capricorn, 
which is his second house. If you cannot have him in any of these three 
places, put him in one of his terms or triplicities or in an oriental angular or 
succeedent house (among all of which the angle of the midheaven is to be 
preferred), direct in his course, and in a masculine quarter, being oriental as 
mentioned above. Beware of his detriment and unfortunate aspects, of which 
the worst of all is a square aspect with Mars, and do not let him be cadent. 
The most important point (of which you should take diligent care) is that 
you should see that the planet is in good condition and quality, and remote 
from infortunes, because when he is like this, he is like a man of good will 
and a lively heart and a great and ample mind, and if another person seeks 
something from him, he cannot find it in himself to deny the petitioner. 
When the same planet is retrograde in his course or cadent from the angles, 
he is like a man full of anger and ill will, who is most ready to deny a petition. 
When you have placed Saturn in a good condition as mentioned above, 
and you desire to speak with him and pray to him, dress yourself in black 
garments; that is, all the clothing on your body should be black, and you 
should also wear a black cap of the sort that doctors wear, and you should 
wear black shoes. Then go to a place set aside for these workings, remote 
from other people, and appropriate to the humbler sort of people, walking 
with a humble mind and in the fashion of the Jews, because Saturn is the 
jEClje PicatrtF-JLiber afcubeu* GBtrition 
lord of their conjunction.218 Have a ring of iron in your hand, and carry an 
iron thurible with you, onto the burning coals of which you should put the 
following suffumigous confection, which is compounded in this way. Take 
opium, actarag (which is an herb),saffron, laurel seed, caraway, wormwood, 
lanolin, colocynth, and the head of a black cat, in equal parts. Grind up 
everything that needs to be ground, blend it with the urine of a black goat, 
and make pills of it. When you wish to work, put one of them on the 
burning coals of the thurible, saving the others; then face the part of the 
heavens in which Saturn is found. While the smoke is rising, say this prayer: 
"O exalted lord whose name is great and who stands above the heaven 
of every other planet, whom God made subtle and exalted! You are the lord 
Saturn, who is cold and dry, shadowy, the author of the good, faithful in 
your friendships, true to your word, durable and persevering in your loves 
and hatreds; whose knowledge reaches far and deep, truthful in your words 
and promises, single in your operations, solitary, remote from others, near to 
suffering and sorrow, far from joy and celebration; you are old, ancient, wise, 
and you abolish knowledge of good things; you are the author of good and 
of evil. Miserable and tormented is he who is made unfortunate by your 
infortunes, and fortunate indeed is he who is touched by your fortunes. In 
you God has placed powers and virtues, and a spirit causing good and evil. I 
ask you, father and lord, by your exalted names and wonderful deeds, that 
you do such and such for me." 
Here say the petition you wish to make, and cast yourself to the earth, 
with your face always turned toward Saturn, and with humility, sorrow, 
and gentleness. Your intention ought to be clean and firm in the matter 
about which you propose to ask, and you should repeat the foregoing words 
many times. Do the aforesaid in Saturn's day and hour, and know that your 
petition will be effectually fulfilled. 
There are other sages who pray to Saturn with different prayers and 
suffumigations, and the latter are composed as follows. Take southernwood, 
bericus seeds, juniper root, preserved dates, and cashew nuts, in equal parts. 
Grind them up and mix them with good wine well aged (that is, many years 
old). Make pills of the mixture, and save them for use. When you wish to do 
the working, do as we have said above, and put some of this suffumigation in 
a thurible, while facing Saturn. As the smoke rises, say: 
"In the name of God and in the name of Heylil,21'J who is the angel to 
whom God has assigned the powers and potencies of Saturn in all things 
218 
According to medieval astrology, each of the world's religions came into 
being due to a particular conjunction ofrhe planets, and so each faith has a ruling 
planet, the lord of its conjunction. 
219 
Isbil in the Arabic text. 
Booh 333 Chapter 7 
\6\ 
accomplished by cold; you who are in the seventh heaven; I invoke you by 
all your names, which are, in Arabic Zohal, in Latin Saturnus, in the Persian 
language Keyhven,22" in Roman Coronez, in Greek Hacoronoz,221 in Indian 
Sacas;222 by all these names of yours I invoke you and call to you. I likewise 
conjure you by the name of God the exalted, who gives power and spirit to 
you, that you will listen to me and accept myprayer with the obedience by 
which you obey God and His dominion, and accomplish such and such for 
» 
me. 
Here speak your petition, with the suffumigation continually being on 
the coals of the thurible. When you have said the aforesaid once, throw 
yourself to the ground facing Saturn, for this is consistent with his nature. 
Repeat the foregoing words, and then make a sacrifice to him.221 Behead a 
black goat, and collect and save its blood; extract its liver and burn the liver to 
ashes in fire, and keep the blood. When you have done this, what you desire 
will come to pass. 
When you wish to speak with Jupiter. If you wish to speak with 
Jupiter, put him in a good condition as we have said before concerning 
Saturn. Dress yourself in yellow and white garments, and go to a place that 
you have set aside for these workings, humbly and gently, in the manner of 
hermits and Christians, with a belt tied around your waist and a crystal ring 
bearing a cross on your finger, and wear a white cap. Take one thurible made 
of the metal of Jupiter,224 in which you put burning fire. A suffumigation 
of the following sort is put into it. Take classa, storax, stalks of columbine, 
peony, calamus root, pine resin, and hellebore seed in equal parts. Grind 
them to powder and mix them with old pure wine (that is, aged for several 
years), and make pills of the mixture. When you wish to do a working, do 
as we have said and cast one of the pills into the fire in the thurible. Turning 
toward the part of heaven where Jupiter is, say the following. 
"May God bless you, Jupiter, blessed lord, who is the greater fortune, 
warm and moist, equitable in all your works, affable, beautiful, wise, truthful, 
lord of truth and equality, far from all evil, merciful, lover of those who 
uphold religions and serve them, who thinks little of the things and vices of 
this world, delighting in religions and religious services, exalted of mind, doer 
220 
Kewan in the Arabic text. 
221 
"Roman" in Picatrix means the Greek dialect of the Byzantine (Eastern 
Roman) Empire, while "Greek" is the dialect of the Christian communities in the 
Muslim world. The names for Saturn in both dialects are descended from the classic 
Greek Kgovoc, Kronos, and are given as Kronos in the Arabic text. These names 
generally suffered much garbling in their passage through Arabic and Latin. 
222 
Sanasara in the Arabic text. 
223 
Most of the rituals in this chapter include animal sacrifices, which were 
standard practice in classical Pagan religion. 
224 
This is traditionally tin. 
itfz 
lE&e ^catrijc-iliber Kubew dfttitton 
of good and free in your nature, high and honored in your heaven, lawful in 
your promises and true in the friendships you have. I conjure you first in the 
name of God Most High who has given you power and spirit, and by your 
good will and lovely effects, by your noble and precious nature, that you will 
do such and such for me." Here name your petition. "For you are the source 
of all good and goodness, and the maker of all good things. Therefore you 
hear all petitions that are of goodly form." 
There are other sages, however, who pray to Jupiter with different 
prayers, and suffumigations, and their suffumigation is made as follows. Take 
common fleabane, frankincense, nettle tree, equal parts; three parts of myrrh, 
and two parts of clean raisins. Grind everything that needs to be ground, mix 
it together with wine that has been aged for many years, and make into pills 
that can be saved for use. When the working is done, one of the pills is to be 
put in the thurible as we have said already concerning Saturn. Dress yourself 
in the manner of a friar or a monk, and upon your neck place one of the 
books of Scripture. Go humbly and meekly to the place where the working 
is to be done. Turn your face toward the heavens, toward that part where 
Jupiter is, and say the following. 
"O angel Raucayehil,"' whom God has set beside Jupiter! You, Jupiter, 
are the greater fortune, perfect, and the maker of good and of the perfection 
of all things. You are perceptive, wise, and great of intellect, far from all evil 
works and all malice and turpitude. I invoke and call you by all your names, 
which are, in Arabic Misteri,"6 in Latin Jupiter, in Persian Bargis,'" in 
Roman Dermiz, in Greek Rauz,-* and in Indian Huazfat."1' I conjure you by 
the spirits and powers that God placed in you, by the obedience with which 
you obey Him, and by your virtues and marvelous effects and by your good, 
radiant and pure nature, that you do such and such for me." Here you should 
say your petition. Prostrate yourself to the ground and pray, and repeat the 
aforesaid often and many times. Afterward, take a white lamb and behead it 
and burn it completely, and eat its liver. Then it will be as you have asked. 
There are others, however, who pray to Jupiter without suffumigating so 
that they may be safe from tempests on the sea. Thus said Rhazes, in his book 
of metaphysics: to escape in time of peril on the sea, turn to face Jupiter, 
when he is at the midheaven, and say the following. 
"God bless you, noble planet, exalted star, precious and honored! In you 
God placed powers and spirits that accomplish good, and give form to the 
225 
Rufija'il in the Arabic text. 
226 
Mustari in the Arabic text. 
227 
Birgis in the Arabic text. A Roman name, Hurmuz, is also given in the 
Arabic text. 
228 
Zeus in the Arabic text. 
229 
Wihasfati in the Arabic text. 
Boob 333 Chapter 12 127 
bodies of the universe as they appear in the divine law, and give life, and help 
those who sail the sea, and preserve their lives. I ask you, by the strength 
that God put in you, that you grant your light and spirit to me, whereby I 
may save myself, and cleanse and purify my nature, so that my perceptions 
and spirit may be illuminated, so that I may be able to know and understand 
things." Ifyour work be properly performed, you will see the similitude of 
a candle burning before you, and if you do not see this, you will know that 
your working was not done correctly. Repeat it until you see the candle 
burning as just mentioned, and it will be as you desire. 
But the consensus of the greater number of sages is that you should face 
toward the part of the heavens where Jupiter is, and say, "May God bless 
you, Jupiter, planet of perfect and noble nature, exalted, honored, precious, 
and benign lord, warm and moist and similar in your nature to air, equitable 
in your works, wise, truthful, lover of religion, wise and learned and lover 
of those who believe and keep the faith, ruler of truth and the law of truth, 
greater fortune, shining, perfect, direct, equal, just in your judgments, pious, 
exalted, honored, disdainer of the sciences of this world, exalted of mind, 
greatly delighting in grand and sublime things and those that are of your 
nature and mind, faithful in speech and promises, true in your friendships, 
perfect in goodness and far from all malice and sin; pure one who fears God, 
giver of the spirit of fortitude and lord of good and true laws, far from every 
evil deed and word (for your thought and intention is to uphold the law 
with perceptiveness, gentleness, intelligence and acuity), delighter in the wise 
and in wisdom, interpreter of dreams, lover of those who uphold religion, 
sustainer of your friends and those who cling to them, you who triumph truly 
and directly, delighter of kings, sublime men, soldiers and rulers, gatherer 
and accumulator of riches so that they may be given away in the service of 
the people and God and that which pleases Him, benefactor of humanity, 
help er of those who obey the laws and commandments of God, keeper of 
promises and of the words of the law, lover of crowds and populous lands and 
populated places, helper of pious people and communities, keeper of fidelity, 
good omens, words, beautiful affections, jests, laughter, long speeches, good 
manners and sense, lover of lying with women in a proper way and according 
to the laws, abominator of all evil deeds opposed to the laws, distinguisher of 
good deeds to which we ought to attach ourselves; you command us to abhor 
wicked deeds and keep far from them. 
"May God bless you, O planet that is helped by God; to you God has 
given piety and goodness. To pure spirits working with God and living in his 
service, you distribute good things and keep them from every evil and worldly 
thing by your solicitude. In the waves of the stormy seas, you are the helper 
of those who call upon God. I ask you, out of your goodness aforesaid, to 
"*4 
C&e $watrij?~3Uber ftitbeua GftJttton 
illuminate us and our sons and our associates with your light, and to deign 
to help with your high and honored powers and spirit, which God has 
placed in you, that by this spirit we may be able to preserve our bodies and 
our activities, and acquire wealth; and we may be able to put away from 
ourselves evil thoughts, sadness, and misery; nor may we have misery in this 
world, or sorrowful thoughts; but that we may live a good life in great and 
perfect abundance, and do works pleasing to the Lord our God; and that by 
your powers and spirit you may fortify our bodies so that in health, without 
any infirmity or suffering, they may be made to preserve our lives, and all 
infirmities and occasions of evil may be kept far from us. 
"Infuse in us, sublime, noble and exalted spirit, your virtue, that we 
may thereby be honored by all people, that they may hold us in reverence 
and fear, and please us, and from them and the earth as well as from those 
of our people who seek to harm us, we can draw away so that they cannot 
do anything by their speech or actions to cause us harm. Let us also draw 
ourselves away from every evil that may be done to us by any person or beast, 
and let us be able to have divine grace and your love, that we may be wholly 
sheltered by your spirit and virtue, and defend us by your good and beautiful 
shelter, and regard us by a favorable aspect, and by this let us be defended 
against all this world. Let those who speak ill of us and their maledictions 
of every kind be helt far from us, and let their eyes be darkened so that they 
cannot see our traps and deceptions, nor say anything evil of us, not seek to 
do any harm to us, nor be able to blame us for any evil deed or word. By the 
noble and exalted virtue of your spirit may we be defended and sheltered, and 
thus gaze upon the hearts and minds of people so that all those who behold 
us shall be terrified by our appearance and be abashed, while by them we may 
be illuminated and honored as the rays of the sun, which are exalted, sublime, 
and honored above everything of this world. 
"Grant the help of your strength and spirit to us, so that we may have 
thereby the perception and intelligence to understand divine laws, and to 
be able to keep them and be helped by them, and that we may be pleasing 
unto God and ready to do his service, as we ought to be. So shelter us with 
the strength of your spirit that we may be helped and defended by it, and by 
the divine God, our Lord, we may be able to attain knowledge, and by His 
grace be enabled to enter therein; and may He protect and defend us from 
the maledictions of the Earth, and draw us away from the tastes of this world, 
and so purify our senses of the superfluities of nature that they may be joined 
to the natural senses,2'" by which we may obtain the sublime and exalted 
knowledge of God and His grace. By your good and upright spirit, so guide 
230 
That is, that the senses may be so purified so that they reflect the universe 
truly. 
Boob 167 Chapter 12 127 
and lead us that our spirits may be cleansed and purified of all superfluity 
and sin, and may be made clear, and remain inwardly unshaken by all the evil 
tastes of the world, sin, and impurity, and be protected by your power and 
spirit, so that they may attain to the high source of spirit and perception, and 
with the spirits of the angels and divine grace remain eternally in the service 
of God. 
"For by you our wills are withdrawn from all corruptible things, that we 
may attain to eternal things. But may God in His mercy pardon and remit 
our sins, misdeeds, and maledictions, that our spirit be united with the things 
similar to Him and divided from things contrary to Him, that we may be able 
to understand, without any confusion, our nature, our forms and figures, and 
our proper names, that we may be able to rest in our spirits from all misery. 
Cleanse our spirits from all the juices of nature, and in this way grant that we 
may be able to obtain the good things of this world as well as the next. Amen. 
"For I invoke you by all your names, that is, in Arabic, Misteri;231 in 
Persian, Bargis;232 in Latin, Jupiter; in Roman, Harmiz;233 in Greek, Biuz;234 
that you may listen to my prayer and hear my words, and that you will deign 
to fulfill my petition. I conjure you by the name Raubeil [Rufija'il], who is 
the angel whom God placed beside you to complete the virtues and powers 
of your spirit and your effects; and by the names2 " Deryes, Ahatyz, Mahaty, 
Darquiz, Themiz, Carueyiz, Dehedeyz, Carnaduyz, Deme, and by the oldest 
works of the world, ancient and exalted above all others, which is without 
beginning or end, and is the principle of all things. By all these names, then, 
I conjure you, that you may listen to the prayer I have spoken and to my 
requests, and fulfill the petition I have made to you, and purify my mind 
toward you. I ask you for these few and limited things for us on account of 
the fragility of our nature and our deeds, and I return in all my doings to 
you and to your spirit, which cleanses and purifies my mind toward you, and 
disposes me toward you, that with humility and benevolence what I ask will 
be granted, and that I may be preserved by your name and spirit. For I know 
and understand your lordship and power, and am obedient to them. May 
you hear my prayer and words, on account of your goodness, and hear all 
my petitions, so that they may be made by me without any defect, and those 
which in our petition we have forgotten to ask for, you will deign to fulfill. 
"Grant us a share in your goodness and nobility, and protect us with 
your spirit and the honored light of your noble mind, so that thereby we may 
231 
Mustari in the Arabic text. 
232 
Birgis in the Arabic text. 
233 
Hurmuz in the Arabic text. 
234 
Zeus in the Arabic text. 
235 
These names are respectively Darjas, Hatis, Magis, Daris, Tahis, Farus, 
Dahidas, Afridus, and Damahus in the Arabic text. 
166 
TD&, l^catrii^iUber Hiibeiw Coition 
have the power by which we may make all our dealings upright, and come 
into wealth. Draw us and our means away from the cravings of people, that 
thereby we may acquire the love of the people, so that our dealings with them 
may be well received, and that they may be obedient to our judgments and 
all our commands. May we be able to gain the grace and favor of kings and 
outstanding men and even our enemies, and have the reputation of being 
upright and honest in all our deeds and words; and let us perceive in our 
hearts the pleasures and vices of the world. May it please you to fulfill all the 
petitions we have already made by your might and the precious, noble, and 
exalted spirit which God has placed in you to accomplish good and to have 
pity on creatures and to distribute the requirements of life to the people of the 
world. 
"I ask you by your pity, and by your great and honored nobility, and 
your noble and precious deeds and the light you have received from our God, 
who is the Lord of the Universe, that you may hear this prayer of mine, and 
turn toward me, and grant what is in my heart and mind even though I do 
not bring it forth in speech. Grant virtue and intelligence to me, by your 
powers and spirit, so that I may know that my petition to you has been well 
received, and reveal that you will help us according to your pity, so that cares 
and sorrow may be cut off from us. Grant to us, from your enduring good 
fortune, good fortune that will endure with us for all time. For I conjure you 
by your names and your pity, goodness, and nobility, that you may be my 
advocate in the presence of the Lord our God, the Precious One and Lord of 
the Universe, that my petition may be effectually fulfilled, and I may easily 
and without effort or sorrow obtain all that I seek; and also receive grace from 
kings and rulers of the earth and powers in the earth and all rational and 
irrational creatures. I conjure you by the Lord our God, who alone is God in 
this world, the world that is gone, and the world that is to come, that I may 
ask from you and your noble powers all that my prayer seeks, that you may 
receive complete blessings from the Lord of the Universe, and grace unto the 
age of the ages. Amen. And having a pure and blessed mind toward the Lord 
our God, Amen." 
Now the sages who are experienced in this science have said of whoever 
does the foregoing working as we have just described it, saying everything 
that we have hitherto said, that the virtue and power of the spirit of Jupiter 
will reach out to him, and all his petitions will be fulfilled in the world, and 
for the whole circle of that year he will be healthy and safe from harm in his 
body, without detriment or infirmity, and all people will be obedient to him, 
and everything that he proposes to do will be accomplished easily, effectually 
and diligently, and he will be welcomed by people everywhere, especially if 
Jupiter is strong in his nativity. You should know that the more humbly and 
Boob 169 Chapter 12 127 
gently you proceed when you do the foregoing working, the better it will 
be, while keeping your mind pure and clean and withdrawn from all things 
of this world, neither thinking about mundane matters nor occupied by 
anything except the working itself. Prostrate yourself to the ground, turning 
your face toward Jupiter and making your prayer humbly, and you will have 
great help fulfilling your petitions in all things. 
When you wish to pray to Mars. When you wish to ask Mars for 
something, and speak to him and honor him, put him in a good condition as 
we have said before concerning Saturn. Dress yourself in red garments, and 
put a red linen or silk cloth on your head as well as a red skullcap, and hang a 
sword from your neck, and arm yourself with all the weapons you can carry; 
and dress yourself in the manner of a soldier or a fighter, and put a bronze216 
ring on your finger. Take a bronze thurible with burning charcoal, in which 
you should put the following suffumigation. 
Take wormwood, aloes, squill, spurge, long pepper, and watercress in 
equal amounts. Grind them up and mix them with human blood. Make 
pills of this, which you may set aside for use. When you wish to begin 
working, put one of them into the thurible, which you have brought with you 
to a remote place specially set aside for this working. When you have arrived 
there, stand upright on your feet and speak secretly, boldly, and without any 
fear, facing the south, Mars being fortunate and in good condition as we have 
said already about the other planets, and these same rules should always be 
observed. As the smoke rises, say the following. 
"O Mars, you who are a honored lord and are hot and dry, mighty, 
weighty, firm of heart, spiller of blood and giver of illnesses thereto! You 
are strong, hardy, acute, daring, shining, agile, and the lord of battler, pains, 
miseries, wounds, prisons, sorrows, and mixed and separated things, who has 
no fear or contemplation of anything, sole helper in all your effects and in 
investigations thereof, strong in calculation and will to conquer and to seek 
after fortune, cause of lawsuits and battles, doer of evil to the weak and the 
strong, lover of the sons of battle, vindicator of wicked people and those who 
do evil in the world. I ask of you and conjure you by your names and your 
qualities that exist in heaven, and by your slayings, and also by your petitions 
to the Lord God who placed power and strength in you, gathering them in 
you and separating them from other planets that you might have strength and 
power, victory over all and great vigor. 
"I ask you by all your names, which are: in Arabic, Marech;2v in Latin, 
236 
Or a copper ring; the Latin word aes can mean either one. All other 
references to bronze in this section may be understood similarly. 
237 
Mirrih in the Arabic text. 
jGE&e PtcatriF-Jlfljer Kubetw CB&ttion 
Mars; in Persian, Baharam;218 in Roman, Bariz; in Greek, Hahuez;2W and 
in Indian, Bahaze.24" I conjure you by the High God of the Universe, that 
you may hear my prayer and attend to my petition, and furthermore see my 
humility and fulfill my petition. I ask that you will do such and such for 
me." Here say whatever your petition may be. Then say: "I conjure you by 
Raucahehil,241 who is the angel whom God has set beside you to complete 
your affairs and effects." Always, when you say the foregoing, the smoke from 
the thurible should continue to rise, and you should repeat the foregoing 
many times, and ask for what you wish. Then behead a leopard, if you can 
get one, and if not, a mouse, which when you have beheaded it, you should 
burn it as we have already said for others, and eat its liver. That which you 
desire shall be accomplished. 
But when you want to ask for the return of something that has been 
taken from you by an enemy, or an enemy has done evil to you and you want 
to be avenged on him, arm yourself with weapons and dress yourself as we 
have already said, and go to a place as noted above carrying the thurible and 
suffumigation with you. As the smoke rises, say the following: 
"O Mars, who is of the nature of ardent flame, author of wars and 
labors, who presses down the exalted and hurls them from their dignities and 
estates; igniter of fury, wrath, and ill will in the hearts of the wicked; maker of 
mortality, killing of people by one another, shedding of blood, and incest with 
women, and cause of the sublimity and elevation of one person over another, 
and of offense and defense! I ask now that you protect and defend me, who 
is united with you in all these things. You are strong, hot and powerful in 
your works, nor do you draw back from whatever you seek and require. I ask 
you by all your names, manners, works, motions, and ways that are in your 
heaven, by your light and your dominion and the virtue of your realm, that 
you will attend to me and hear my petition. 
"I have been vanquished by such and such a person, who out of his 
pride and willfulness caused and sought to cause iniquity to me. You are the 
commander of all those who turn to you, you enact and fulfill petitions made 
to you. I ask you by the light, strength, and power placed in you by God, the 
Lord of all the world, that you may send one from among your furies against 
this my enemy so that he may be separated from me, and direct his thoughts 
so that he may not remember me or think of me, and send against him pains 
and miseries and great vengeance and harm of such a kind that I will be able 
to receive from him what he took from me, and that his hands and feet may 
238 
Bahram in the Arabic text. 
239 
The Roman and Greek names are both Ares in the Arabic text. 
240 
Angara in the Arabic text. 
241 
Rubija'il in the Arabic text. 
) 1 5 o o b 333 Chapter 6 >5? 
be cut off by me, and that he may receive every evil and misery from me, as 
well as the wrath and fury of the king; that his body and his wealth alike be 
given by me to thieves and robbers; and let him suffer in his body from sores 
and fevers and blindness of his eyes and deafness of his ears; and let all his 
senses be destroyed so that he is made blind, deaf, and mute, and contracted 
in all his limbs; and give to him pains and protracted miseries, and spoil food 
and drink and every flavor for him; and let him be deprived of life, and inflict 
on him every kind of misery and pain; and on his body, wealth, children, 
and associates inflict vengeance, and the wrath and fury of the king; pour out 
on him the enmity of his neighbors and his parents, and let thieves have his 
lordship and lands, and pursue him wherever he goes by land or sea. Let all 
the aforesaid be effectually accomplished, that he may be hurled down from 
his office and estate. 
"You it is who are the doer of strong, furious, and evil works. I conjure 
you by your strengths and by your evil and strong effects on those who 
change, alter and corrupt all generated things, and on those who act against 
mariners and do evil to people, and all who labor in these works of yours. 
I conjure you that you may listen to my petition and I ask that you will 
be strong to fulfill it and that you pour out my misery and the evil works 
that the man about whom I pray to you has done to me. I conjure you by 
Raubeyl,242 who is the angel whom the God of the Universe set beside you 
to complete all your effects and potencies. I conjure you by your spirit, that 
spirit which condemns sailors on the sea, and by the power that you pour out 
into the hearts of furious men and lovers of war, and slayers of one another, 
and those who enter into arduous deeds and the bitterest of wars. By all this 
I conjure you that you will hear my prayer and direct your attention to my 
affairs, and grant the strength of your spirit to me, who has set out the prayer 
you hear; and may you receive perfect honor from God, who is the Lord of 
all the Universe. You are the commander of good and of good events, and the 
doer and maker of evils, inflicting pains and miseries on those who deserve 
them. Amen. Amen. 
"I furthermore conjure you by the names24-' Dayadeburz, Hayaydez, 
Handabuz, Maharaz, Ardauz, Beydehydiz, Mahydebiz, Deheydemiz, by 
all which I conjure you that you will grant my petition, and attend to my 
requests, and have pity upon my lamentations and tears, and heal my injuries, 
and protect and defend me from the malice and treachery of this person 
and others who seek to do harmy to me. I conjure you by the high God of 
the entire firmament, the Lord of great power and dominion, namer of the 
242 
This is again Rubija'il in the Arabic text. 
243 
These names are respectively Dagidijus, Hagamadis, Gidijns, Ma'ras, 
Ardagus, Hidagidis, Mahidas, and Dahidamas in the Arabic text. 
i7° 
l?icatrir iliber Kubeua edition 
prophets and the lord of good, giver of all life on Earth, who created life and 
death, end and persistence. He indeed it is who remains and endures for the 
infinite age of ages, without beginning or end; by Him I conjure you that in 
this hour and time you will fulfill my petition. Amen." 
Repeat these words many times, saying them over the smoke of the 
thurible, and your intention will be fulfilled. If you behead one of the beasts 
of Mars mentioned above and burn it in the fire and do with it as is done 
with the others, you will be the more certain to have your petition fulfilled. 
To avenge yourself on an enemy. The ancient sages used to do this 
working in the proper manner to the star of vengeance, which is near the 
pole: that is, Benethnays,-1'1 which belongs to the constellation of the Great 
Bear. They made their prayer in the following manner. 
When you have an enemy who does evil to you or seeks to do the same, 
and you wish to send him pain and misery so that he will no longer think of 
you, so that you may be able to avenge yourself by this working, go into a 
house that you have constructed for this purpose,and face the part of heaven 
where Benethnays then is. Cast the suffumigation described below onto the 
burning coals in the thurible. While the smoke rises toward the world above, 
say the following. 
"May God bless you, great Benethnays, you who are exalted in your 
place and beautiful in the firmament. I call and conjure you by the power 
that God, the founder of all things, has placed in you, that you will send to 
such and such a person, a spirit that will enter into his body in such a manner 
that his body will be bound and knotted up so that all his members will be 
accursed and all his senses returned to nothingness, so that he shall altogether 
lack sight, hearing, and every sensation, motion, speech, eating, drinking, 
delight in anything, and life itself, and that you, O star Benethnays, may hurl 
him down to death and pour out on him every kind of misery, in every part 
of him; let his eyes behold only labor and sorrow, the wrath and fury of kings 
and the victory of his enemies and of wild and domestic beasts; command 
him to suffer malevolence from his neighbors and parents, and send harsh 
and manifest vengeance swiftly upon him in all things; destroy his body and 
house, destroy him by casting him down from high places, make his eyes 
start from his head, break his hands and feet, destroy all his members, and 
inflict upon him the strongest and most extreme miseries and the harshest 
punishments that a human being can suffer; turn him away from the God of 
mercy and pity, nor have any pity upon him, nor remove any impediment 
from him; and all that I have said, do swiftly. 
"My mind is freely set on you on account of the great injuries I have 
sustained from him and the evil that he has done and sought to do to me 
244 
This is Benetnasch or Alkaid, era Ursae Majoris. 
Boob 333 Chapter 173 
,4, 
without any reasonable cause. You are the star that effectually accomplishes 
petitions and supplications made to you, and protects those who have 
recourse to you. Therefore I ask you to pour out your power and spirit 
on the aforementioned person with great fury and wrath, and send all the 
aforesaid punishments on him swiftly, that he may have pains, miseries, and 
great sorrows, and be maltreated and despised by everyone who sees him, and 
pour out on him great infirmities and sorrows in all his members, and inflict 
changes upon him so that he suffers all the pains and miseries I have described 
to you. I therefore conjure you by your power and spirit that you will 
remember my petition, and mourn for my tears, and grant to me your spirit, 
power, and understanding, that I may know that you have effectually heard 
my petition. 
I likewise conjure you by God of the great firmament and 
exalted powers, and by Him, that is, who has dominion and power over all 
creatures of heaven and earth, who is God himself, to hear my petition, and I 
now ask you to accomplish it punctually by the name of that High Lord who 
is God, and by His power and His virtue, that you accomplish my petition 
and closely consider my speech and words." 
When you have said all the preceding in this way, prostrate yourself to the 
ground, and repeat the same words many times. Do this continually while 
the smoke rises from the suffumigation, which is made as follows. Take storax, 
nutmeg, holly, and aloes wood, one ounce each, and spikenard and mastic, 
three ounces each. Grind it all and mix it with the best wine, and make pills 
of it. You may set it aside to use whenever you want to work with the polar 
stars. 
When you want to pray to the Sun. When you want to pray to the Sun 
and ask anything from him, such as asking for grace from the king, and the 
friendship of lords, and lordships and how to acquire them, make the Sun 
fortunate and put him on the ascendant, and do this in his day and hour. 
Dress yourself in royal vestments of yellow and golden silk, and put a crown 
of gold on your head, and likewise a golden ring on your finger, and equip 
yourself in the manner of the great men of the Chaldeans, because the Sun 
is the lord of their ascension. Go into a house set apart and dedicated to this 
work, and place your right hand on your left, and face the Sun with a modest 
and humble expression, the way the timid and modest look. Take a thurible 
of gold and a handsome rooster whose neck is beautiful, and 011 its neck put 
a little burning candle which is set on top of a single piece of wood the size 
of the palm of your hand. In the fire in the thurible put the suffumigation, 
which will be described below. When the Sun rises, turn the rooster to face 
him, and with the smoke ascending continually from the thurible, say the 
following. 
"You who are the foundation of heaven and are exalted above all the stars 
•72 
2D&e Picatriy-JLCbcr Kubeua qfttition 
and all the planets, holy and reverend, I ask that you may hear my petition, 
and grant to me the grace and friendship of such and such a king and other 
kings as well. I conjure you by Him who gave you light and life. You are the 
light of the world. I invoke you by all your names: that is, Arabic, Yazemiz;24' 
in Latin, Sol; in Chaldean, Maher;246 in Roman, Lehuz;24" in Indian, Araz.24* 
You are the light of the world and its illumination; you stand in the middle 
of the planets. You it is who cause generation in the world by your virtue 
and heat; from your sublime place. I ask you for your exaltation and will, 
that you may deign to help me so that this king and certain other kings of 
this world shall put me in an exalted and sublime position, that I may have 
dominion and exaltation just as you are the lord of the other planets and the 
stars, who receive their light and illumination from you. I ask you who are 
the foundation of the whole firmament, that you will have pity upon me, 
and listen to the words and prayers I say to you." While the smoke rises, you 
should say the above words. 
The suffumigation that is necessary for this work, however, is that which 
we call the hermits' suffumigation, and this suffumigation (as the ancient 
sages say) has great and marvelous effects. It is compounded of 31 spices, and 
its composition is as follows. 
Take common fleabane, bdellium, myrrh, opium, elecampane, and cicely, 
7 oz. each; nettle tree, lavender, and peeled pine nuts, 3 oz. each; orris root, 
cardomel, cardamom, aromatic calamus, frankincense, and mace, 5 oz. each; 
dried roses, saffron, spikenard, caper root, and cinquefoil, 4 oz. each; aromatic 
coltsfoot, balsam grains, and mother of thyme, 9 oz. each; 1 oz. of squill; 2 
lbs. each cucumber seed, cardamom, terebinth, powdered dates, and peeled 
raisins; and 5 lbs. clarified honey. Grind everything that needs grinding, mix 
with the best wine, and make into pills; and reserve these for the operations 
of the Sun, suffumigating with them when you pray the aforesaid prayer to 
the Sun. When you have finished, behead the rooster and eat its liver. Do 
everything as we have said elsewhere, and you will have your desire. 
The suffumigation and prayer of the Sun, however, may be done better 
in this way. Dress yourself in clothes of the kind already mentioned and 
prepare yourself in the way we have described above,and put the following 
suffumigation in the fire of the thurible. Take saffron, storax, frankincense, 
nutmeg, litharge, wild pomegranate flower, aloes wood, and saxifrage in equal 
parts. Powder and mix them, and make pills which you may set aside for use. 
When you do the working, put one of the pills on the burning coals of the 
245 
Shams in the Arabic text. 
246 
This name is given as Mihr, and identified as Persian rather than Chaldean, 
in the Arabic text. 
247 
Helios in the Arabic text. 
248 
Aras in the Arabic text. 
llBoob 333 Chapter 7 
'73 
thurible. While the smoke rises, say the following. 
"May God bless you, Sun, you who are fortunate and the greater fortune, 
hot and dry, luminous, resplendent, noble, beautiful, exalted, and honored 
king over all the stars and planets. Power of beauty, subtlety, good disposition, 
truth, wisdom, knowledge and riches, which by your virtue are acquired, 
and in you are made strong. You are the lord of the six planets, which are 
governed by your motion, and you reign over them and have kingship and 
lordship over them, and they are obedient to you and depend on your aspect, 
so that when their motion is conjoined with yours, at once, obedient to you, 
they overflow with your light; and when they are corporeally conjunct with 
you their rays are consumed, and they are wholly concealed by your face, 
and all of them shine by your light, virtue and splendor. You have power 
over them all. You are king, and they are vassals. You give light and power 
to them all, and they receive fortunate influences from you and do fortunate 
things when they aspect you with a favorable aspect, and when they aspect 
you with an unfortunate aspect, they lose their fortunate influences and 
become infortunes. No one can possibly perceive all your good and noble 
qualities, which are infinite to our intellects." 
When you have made the foregoing allocution in this way, prostrate 
yourself to the ground facing the Sun, and repeat the foregoing words many 
times. Make a sacrifice of some animal of the Sun according to what we have 
said about the superior planets, and you will have your desire. 
Another prayer to the Sun, which the sages say is for kings, powerful 
people, and exalted people when they have been separated from their power 
and realms and wish to return to their original estate. When you wish to do 
a working for this or a similar purpose, first put Scorpio on the ascendant, 
with the Sun forming an aspect to Mars. Take a thurible of gold, and put 
burning coals with it; and hold grains of amber the size of a fava bean in your 
hand, and cast them into the fire of the thurible one after another. As the 
smoke rises toward the Sun (that is, when he is in the middle of the sky), turn 
toward him and say the following. 
"O Sun, you who are the source of riches, the increment of power, the 
life of decoration, the root of exaltation and the beginning of every good 
thing! I place all my will on you, and with it place myself wholly in your 
hands. I beseech you on account of my decline and fall and the diminution 
of my power, and because people rejoice over me and do not respect me 
according to my estate. I conjure you by the exalted Lord God, who is the 
mover of your movements and the giver of your power, by whom you are able 
to complete your acts, and by the obedience with which you obey the same 
Lord, and by the reason you have to help and save by projecting yourself and 
your will (that is, to those who pray to you and supplicate you with a clean 
'74 
C&e PicatrtF-Jlfljer Kubeme dftrition 
and unblemished will) and by the dominion and power that the Lord has 
given you above all other planets, that you hearken to me, and free my mind, 
and remove from it troubled and sorrowful thoughts, and restore me to my 
power, estate, and lands, and grant that one in particular of the people of 
this world shall fall under my obedience and domination; for you are worthy 
to distribute your power, fortitude, exaltation, and nobility, by which I shall 
have fortune and power to work upon all things so that they may be obedient 
unto me. 
"I conjure you by your concealed and hidden nobilities, and by the help 
that you have in ordering motions, and by the influence, power, strength, and 
works that you have in the generation of things in the world, and by your pity 
which touches the poor, and by your fortune which touches the great, and 
by your fidelity and lawfulness which you have toward the Lord God, who 
gives power to you, and by your duty to help those who flee to you and call 
to you, and by the paths and passages of heaven which have no similitude on 
Earth, that you hear my prayer and understand my request and listen to my 
words and effectually accomplish my petition. All those who have a clean and 
unblemished mind toward you will have perfect salvation." 
Say this while wearing the clothing that we have described above, 
standing with your face toward the Sun, and observing all the other things 
touched on earlier, you will have your desire. 
When you want to pray to Venus. When you want to pray to Venus 
and ask her for something among those things that pertain to her, see that she 
is far from the infortunes, direct and not retrograde, and in good condition. 
Then dress yourself and adorn yourself in one of two manners, of which the 
best is the garments and ornaments of the exalted men of Arabia.24'' Dress 
yourself in white garments, and wear a white cloth on your head, which 
is their sign. The other manner is to adorn yourself entirely as a woman. 
Dress yourself in a long garment of silk and gold mixed together, precious 
and beautiful, and on your head wear a crown ornamented with pearls and 
precious stones, and on your hand a golden ring ornamented with a pearl, 
and golden bracelets on your wrists; and in your right hand hold a mirror, 
and in your left carry a comb. Place before you a jug of wine, and sprinkle 
your garments with powdered aromatic spices and sweet-smelling things and 
nutmeg, as women do. Then take a thurible of gold alloyed with silver, and 
put burning coals into it; onto these put the suffumigation we will describe 
shortly. As the smoke rises, say the following. 
"May God bless you, O Venus, you who are queen and fortune, and are 
cold and moist, equitable in your effects and complexion, pure and lovely 
249 
Islam was traditionally ruled by Venus, as suggested by the green flag 
bearing the evening star alongside the Moon, which is its traditional banner. 
Boob 75 Chapter 12 127 
and sweetly scented, beautiful and ornate. You are the lady of adornment, 
of gold and silver; you delight in love, joy, ornaments and jests, elegance, 
songs and music that are sung or played on strings, written music and songs 
played on organs, games and comforts, rest and love.2'" In your effects you 
remain equal. You take delight in wine, rest, joy, lying with women, for in 
all of these your natural effects consist. I invoke you by all your names: that 
is, in Arabic, Zohara;2'1 in Latin, Venus; in Persian, Anyhyt;2'2 in Roman, 
Affludita;2'' in Greek, Admenita;2,,i in Indian, Sarca.2" I conjure you by the 
Lord God, the lord of the highest firmament, and by the obedience you offer 
to God, and by the power and lordship He has over you, that you listen to my 
prayer, and consider my petition, and do such and such for me." Here speak 
your petition. "And I conjure you by Beyteyl,2'6 who is that angel whom 
God has set beside you to complete all your powers and effects." 
When you have said the foregoing, prostrate yourself to the ground 
toward Venus, and repeat the foregoing while you remain prostrate to the 
ground. Then raise yourself up and repeat the foregoing words again. When 
this is done, behead a pigeon and a turtle-dove, and eat their livers; their 
bodies are to be burned in the thurible that has already been mentioned. 
While you do the aforesaid, let the suffumigation be in the fire of the 
thurible. The composition of this suffumigation is this. Take aloes wood, 
gall, costus, saffron, opium, mastic, poppy hulls, willow leaves, and orris root 
in equal parts. Grind them all and mix them with rose water; make from this 
pills the size of a fava bean, which you cast into the fire of the thurible when 
you perform this working as described above. 
A prayer to Venus for love. You can also create love between two people 
and between husband and wife in this way. Dress and adorn yourself as we 
have said above, and see that the condition ofVenus and the other planets is 
as described above, and put into the fire the following suffumigation. Take 
gall and long pepper, 5 oz. each, and raisins, frankincense, and mastic, 3 oz. 
each. Grind them all and mix them with rain water, and make pills the size of 
a fava bean, which you throw on the coals one after another, and so on until 
you reach the end of the working, nor should the smoke be absent at any 
point during the working. While the smoke rises, say: 
"O Venus, you who are the spirit of live and the ordainment of friendship 
and the adornment of conjunction! From you proceeds the power of 
250 
The repetition is in the original. 
251 
Zuhara in the Arabic text. 
252 
Anahid in the Arabic text. 
253 
Aphrodite in the Arabic text. 
254 
Tijanija in the Arabic text. 
255 
Surfa in the Arabic text. 
256 
Bita'il in the Arabic text. 
2C&e i^catrij^Jlfljer Kubeua CDttion 
enjoyment and love, and from you flow good friendship and mutual delight 
among people, and from you, having been accumulated by you, the spirits 
of good desires and evil desires redound. From you proceeds the root of 
the conjunction of love between men and women. From you is the root of 
generation. You draw the spirit of one person toward another, and by you 
they are united; by love their spirits are disposed toward one another, and by 
your virtue love is generated. O Venus, you who are lovely, you who give the 
virtue of the conjunction of love, by which you desire those who seek you! 
"I beseech you by your names, and by the sublime and exalted name of 
God, who created you and moves you in your heaven, that you may listen to 
my prayer and petition, concerning the ill will that such and such a person 
has and wishes to have toward me, and the misery, labor, and sorrow that 
are from their57 enmity and ill will, and that have diverted good things from 
me—this is the reason why I am conquered. I ask and supplicate that you 
turn the aforesaid person toward me, along with their love and friendship, 
and I ask that you send your spirits and powers upon them and their spirit, 
and upon the essence of their spirit, their speech, and all their spirit and 
thoughts be directed toward me; and move them by this movement and 
power toward me, as though by the movement of flame and the power of 
impetuous winds. I conjure you and your spirits—you who are true in your 
friendships and loves, and lovely and firm in your associations; your spirits, 
who bring about loves and conjunctions and move the power of delights and 
vices in spirits and bring about love—by all these I conjure you that you will 
hear and attend to this my petition and prayer. 
"I likewise conjure you by Beyteyl,258 who is the angel whom the Lord 
our God has set beside you to fulfill your powers and effects. I conjure you 
also by your spirit, with which you have strength and potency in your works. 
I conjure you by your light and radiance, that you pour into their heart and 
thoughts the desire for enjoyments, vices and loves, that you attend to my 
affairs and fulfill my petition, so that you will fulfill all that I have desired 
from you and transmit to me a share in your light, potency, and love, by 
which I will be able to perceived that my petition has been heard by you. For 
it is you who joins hearts, who unites love and benevolence, who combines, 
who brings about joy, solace, and delight, that you may have complete and 
perfect salvation in eternity. Amen." 
When you have said and done the aforesaid as given above, sacrifice a 
white dove and eat its liver. Burn the rest of it, save the ashes, and put them 
in the food of anyone you wish; you will be well loved by that person. 
257 
Here and elsewhere in this ritual, "their" may be replaced by "his" or "her" 
depending 011 the gender of the person in question. 
258 
Bita'il in the Arabic text. 
B o o b 3 3 3 Chapter 7 
'77 
When you want to pray to Mercury. When you want to pray to 
Mercury and ask him for one of the petitions that pertain to him, such as 
petitions of scribes and regencies of kings, dress yourself in the garments of 
a notary and scribe, when the Moon is conjunct with Mercury, and proceed 
in all your actions as though you were a scribe. On your finger put a ring 
of fixed mercury,2'1' because with such a ring Hermes the wise used to work. 
Sit on a chair of the kind that schoolmasters use, and turn to face Mercury, 
holding a piece of paper in your hands as though you intended to write on it. 
Have the proper suffumigation and a thurible of fixed mercury full of fire, in 
which you put the suffumigation. As the smoke rises, say: 
"May God bless you, good lord Mercury, you who are truthful, 
perceptive, intelligent, and the sage and instructor of every kind of writing, 
arithmetic, computation, and science of heaven and earth! You are a noble 
lord and temperate in your joys, the lord and sustainer and subtle interpreter 
of wealth, business, money, and profound perceptions. You are the dispositor 
and significator of prophecy and prophets and their perceptions, reasoning 
and doctrine, apprehending diverse sciences; of subtlety, intelligence, 
philosophy, geometry, the sciences of heaven and earth, divination, geomancy 
and poetry; of writing, rhetoric, keenness of the senses, profundity in all 
professions and actions, quickness, the conversion of one business into 
another, making things clear or clean; of sustaining and helping people and 
making them content with what they have; of piety, perception, tranquility, 
averting evil, and of good religion and human law. You have concealed 
yourself by your subtlety so that no one else can possibly know your nature or 
determine your effects. 
"You are fortunate with fortunes and unfortunate with infortunes, 
masculine with masculine planets and feminine with feminine ones, diurnal 
with diurnal planets and nocturnal with nocturnal ones; you exist and 
harmonize with them in all their natures, and you conform yourself to 
them in all their forms, and you transmute yourself into all their qualities. 
Therefore I call on you and invoke you by all your names, that is, in Arabic, 
Hotarit;2™ in Latin, Mercurius; in Roman, Haruz;2''1 in Persian, Tyr;2''2 in 
Indian, Meda;2W I conjure you above all by the high Lord God, who is the 
lord of the firmament and of the realm of the exalted and great; by Him I 
conjure you, that you will receive my petition, and grant to me that which 
259 
That is, mercury that has been solidified. Methods of fixing Mercury are 
important teachings in Western and Hindu alchemical tradition. 
260 
Utarid in the Arabic text. 
261 
Harus in the Arabic text. The Arabic text also gives Hermes as the Greek 
name. 
262 
Tir in the Arabic text. 
263 
Budha in the Arabic text. 
178 
Ki>e Picatrip-JLibcr ilubeua CDDitton 
I ask, and pour out the powers of your spirit upon me, by which I shall be 
made strong, and be able to have my petition fulfilled, and be made apt and 
disposed to gain knowledge and wisdom. Make me beloved and well received 
by such and such kings and exalted men, make me exalted and honored by 
all peoples and kings, that I may be given secrets, that they may receive my 
words effectually and have need of me, and seek from me knowledge and 
wisdom in writing, arithmetic, astrology and divination. Work on me in 
such a way and so dispose me that by all these things I may receive profit and 
wealth, honors and exaltations before kings and exalted persons, and all that I 
am able to receive. 
"Thus I conjure you by Arquyl,264 who is the angel whom God has set 
beside you to complete your acts and works, that you will receive my petition 
and hear my prayer and attend to my requests and fulfill them. I ask also 
that you help and strengthen me with your spirit, and join me by your spirit 
and power to the affection of kings, and aid me to attain knowledge and 
wisdom by your virtue, and by your assistance so help me that I may know 
what I do not know, and can understand what I do not understand, and can 
see what I do not see, and remove me from necessity and all that decreases 
understanding and leads to division and illness, so that I may attain to the 
level of the sublime ancient sages (those, that is, who had knowledge and 
understanding in their spirits and minds), and send to my spirit your power 
and spirit, in order to elevate me, and make me attain to the aforesaid state, 
and direct me in knowledge and wisdom and in all my deeds, that I may have 
grace and power by serving kings and exalted people, and in this way acquire 
wealth and treasures, and swiftly fulfill this my petition. Therefore I conjure 
you by the Lord God, lord of the high firmament and the realm of power, 
that you may receive my petition and effectually fulfill all the things that I 
have asked of you." 
When you have said all of the foregoing, prostrate yourself to the ground 
toward Mercury, humbly and devotedly, and repeat the foregoing prayer once. 
Then raise your head, and behead a rooster that has a large comb, and burn 
it in the way described earlier, and eat its liver. The suffumigation that is to 
be burnt is compounded in this way: take nuts of the holm-oak, cumin, dry 
cloves, myrtle roots, bitter almond bark, acacia, tamarisk grains, grapevine 
roots, and squill, all in equal parts. Grind and mix with pure and delicate 
wine, make into pills, and save them for use. 
When you want to pray to the Moon. When you want to pray to the 
Moon and ask her for any of those things that pertain to her, dress as though 
you were a child, and have with you things that smell good, and hold a silver 
ring in your hand, and be quick in your movements and actions, and speak 
264 
Harqil in the Arabic text. 
ilBoob 333 Chapter 7 
•79 
elegantly, well, and punctually. Carry in front of you a thurible of silver. In 
the fourteenth day of the lunar month, when the Moon is above the earth and 
aspecting the fortunes with a favorable aspect, wash your face, turn toward 
the Moon, and say the following. 
"May God bless you, O Moon, you who are the blessed lady, fortunate, 
cold and moist, equitable and lovely. You are the chief and the key of all the 
other planets, swift in your motion, having light that shines, lady of happiness 
and joy, of good words, good reputation, and fortunate realms. You are a 
lover of the law and a contemplator of the things of this world, subtle in your 
contemplations. Joy, songs, and jests you take delight in and love; you are 
the lady of ambassadors and messengers and the concealer of secrets. Free 
and precious one, you are closer to us than the other planets, you are larger 
than all and most luminous; you are apt to good and evil, you join the planets 
together, you carry their light, and by your goodness you rectify all things 
whatsoever. All the things of this workd are adorned by your beauty and 
accursed by your curse. You are the beginning of all things and you are the 
end thereof. Thus I call to you and I conjure you by Celan26\ who is the 
angel whom God set beside you to complete all your effects, that you will 
take pity on me, and hear my petition, and by the humility which you bear 
toward our Lord Most High and His kingdom, that you will hear me in the 
things concerning which I beseech and ask you. By all your names I invoke 
you: that is, in Arabic, Camar;266 in Latin, Luna; in Persian, Mehe;267 in 
Greek, Zamahyl;268 in Indian, Cerim;269 in Roman, Celez, 2"u that you hear 
my petition in this place." 
Then prostrate yourself to the earth, facing the Moon, repeating 
the foregoing words. While doing this, keep suffumigating with the 
suffumigation of the hermits, which is composed of 28 components in this 
way: take one ounce each of mastic, cardamom, savine, storax, and long 
pepper; two ounces each of elecampane, myrrh, squill, dar sessahal, spikenard, 
costus, frankincense, and saffron; four ounces each of melon, melon seed, 
and henna root; three ounces each of orris root, nettle tree, Indian poley, 
and shelled cleaned pine nuts; two pounds laudanum, St. John's wort, apple 
leaves, dried roses, and rice; two pounds of raisins; and five pounds of dates. 
Mix these with enough of the most subtle wine to bind them together, and 
make into pills the size of a fava bean. When the working is finished, take 
a calf and behead it, and burn it in a great fire, as we have said before. If 
265 
Silija'il in the Arabic text. 
266 
Qamar in the Arabic text. 
267 
Meh in the Arabic text. 
268 
Sam'a'il in the Arabic text. 
269 
Suma in the Arabic text. 
270 
Selene in the Arabic text. 
i8o 
^fcatrfo-JUber Kubetw CBDition 
you sacrifice an ewe instead, burn her and eat her liver, as we have described 
earlier concerning other sacrifices. Your petition will be fulfilled. 
The opinion of the sages, however, concerning opportune prayers and 
petitions to the planets, is that each planet acts in matters corresponding to 
its nature, as fortunes in good things and infortunes in bad ones. When you 
wish to seek anything from a planet, see to it that the lord of the ascendant is 
aspected by that planet, and the almutaz of the figure is oriental, and elevated 
in four altitudes in its epicycle as well as oriental therein;2"1 this is when 
they would ask their petitions. Also, the virtues and effects of the planets 
are stronger and more influential at night. Be careful that you do not ask 
anything from any planet that is not of its own nature, for in this case your 
petition will fail. 
The sages who made these prayers and sacrifices to the planets in 
mosques272 did all of the foregoing things. While the planet moved through 
eight degrees of heaven, they would sacrifice one animal, and similarly when 
it declined by another eight degrees they would offer another sacrifice. They 
say that Hermes commanded them to do this in mosques or in their own 
churches. These sages say of the aforementioned Hermes that he was the lord 
of the three flowers of things, that is, king, prophet, and sage. They require 
that no animal of two colors, nor black, nor having a broken bone nor a horn 
broken in any way, nor an injured eye, nor having any flaw in its body, be 
sacrificed in their mosques. When they behead an animal, they take out its 
liver at once. They examine it, and if they find any defect or spot in it, they 
say that the lord of that place has some notable impediment. They then cut 
up the liver and give it to one of the bystanders to eat.27* 
They call Mars in their language Mara smyt, which means Lord of 
Malefactors, and they say that he is a malefactor because he is quick to do 
evil. His image according to their opinion is the image of a man holding a 
sword in his right hand and a flame of fire in his left, and threatening in turn 
with sword and fire; and for this reason he is honored by them, and they 
make sacrifices out of fear of him and to prevent his evils. The sacrifices they 
make to him are made when the Sun enters Aries, which is the house of Mars, 
and similarly when the Sun enters Scorpio they make another sacrifice. 
271 
The epicycle is the smaller circle that, in medieval astronomy, each planet 
except the Sun and Moon traced through the heavens in addition to its orbit. In 
modern terms, the ruling planet of the chart must be significantly further than its 
average distance from the Earth, but not yet at its maximum distance. 
272 
The Arabic version of the Picatrix makes it clear that the rituals and 
invocations in this chapter are those of the Harranian Sabians. 
273 
This is a remarkably good description of the ancient ritual of animal 
sacrifice, complete with hepatoscopy (divination by the liver of a sacrificed animal), 
one of the standard ancient forms of divination. The "lord of that place" is 
presumably the planetary god ruling the temple where the sacrifice takes place. 
Boob 183 Chapter 12 
127 
They have an experiment with a child, which is as follows. In the month 
that the Sun spends in Scorpio, they would take a boy and lead him into a 
house set apart and decorated for this working, and have him stand upright 
on his feet. They would bring a handful of tamarisk seeds, and burn them in 
a brass thurible. Over the boy they would utter words pertaining to Mars and 
dress him in the garments of Mars. If the fire touched the back of the boy, 
they judged by this that he was unqualified, inappropriate, and inapt for this 
working; while if the fire touched his front parts, they asserted that he was 
proper and apt for this work."4 
Then they took him to their house of prayer, where they examined him 
to see that he was healthy in all his members. They then took him to another 
house where it was dark, and veiled his eyes. The priest was waiting for him, 
and held a spear of red tamarisk wood above him, They dressed the boy in 
animal skins, and put a thurible full of fire next to his right foot and another 
thurible full of water next to his left foot. Meanwhile the boy's mother came 
with a rooster in her hands and sat in the door of the house. 
The priest then swore the boy to secrecy, and bound him by the bonds of 
an oath that he would never reveal the secrets of the ritual for all eternity, and 
terrified him fiercely so that he did not reveal it, telling him that if he revealed 
any of the foregoing to anyone, he would instantly die. When this was 
finished, the boy's eyes were unveiled and opened. His mother then came in 
with the aforementioned rooster, and the priest took the rooster in his hands 
and beheaded it above the boy. At once the mother threw a red cloth over the 
boy and led him out of the house. As soon as the boy left the house, he put a 
ring on his index finger that bore the image of an ape. r' 
They also say that the first sacrifice pertaining to Saturn is when he is in 
Taurus, and they sacrifice a cow to him, asserting that its horns are placed 
in the manner of a crown, and that it is more beautiful than other animals 
and more proper for sacrifice than any other animal. They sacrificed it after 
it had been fed on herbs gathered by virgin girls in the garden of the Sun for 
a certain time, and afterwards they returned home by roads other than the 
ones by which they left home. They considered all of the foregoing to be the 
greatest secrets of their workings. They made sure that the aforementioned 
cow was completely intact, and without any white spot, however small. 
Above its eyes they put a golden chain and wrapped this around its horns. 
274 
Tamarisk seeds thrown onto hot coals burst and fly some distance. If the 
boy turned his back on the burning seeds in an attempt to flee, the burn marks on the 
clothing on his back would identify him as a coward; if he faced them bravely, he was 
fit for the rest of this ritual of Mars. 
275 
This fascinating "experiment" is a ritual of initiation into a mystery cult of 
Mars for boys on the brink of manhood. There are few if any accounts of ancient 
mystery initiations that give so much detail. 
ITfje Wcatx\v%ihex Kiibeiw CDition 
They say that the wise Hermes taught them to do the working in this way. 
When they wished to behead the cow, they prepared it for death, and 
burned the suffumigation of Saturn before it and said prayers after the 
manner of the Greeks. The priest beheaded it with a sharp sword in which 
no defect or diminution was found, and collected the blood in a dish, and 
received its tongue, ears, snout, and eyes; and the rest was carried away in 
pieces.-"'' Later they used to inspect the blood that remained in the dish and 
the foam that rose atop the blood, and from the foam interpreted the lordship 
and motion of Saturn, which according to them is the first motion, because 
in him motion begins and ends. They were accustomed to make this kind of 
sacrifice when Saturn entered the sign ofTaurus. 
These same men used to wash their faced and bodies with wine and 
powdered salt, because it makes their skin or hide dry, and because it makes 
the blood move freely in their bodies. They hold that their work is completed 
by this. 
They had a closed house into which no one entered, and in it was a deep 
well. When the Sun entered into the first degree of Leo, they would send to 
the land of Canuiz2"" for a red ram, and cover it with precious cloths. They 
led it to a place full of trees and flowers, making much rejoicing, and gave 
it as much wine as it would drink. They then led it to this house at night, 
and threw it down the well just mentioned, and bathed it therein in sesame 
oil. Then they drew it up out of the well and gave it dried roses, lentils, fava 
beans, rice, honey, and wheat to eat, all mixed together. Finally, 28 days after 
the Sun's entrance into Leo, they led it at night to a grove outside the city 
and outside populated land, and cut off its head. They made a pit there and 
buried the ram in it. The head, though, they carried back to the house of the 
working, and stored it up facing their images.2"8 They said that out of it they 
heard a faint voice, by which, they said, they learned the length of life of their 
king and the increase or decrease of their people. 
The one who revealed the foregoing workings and taught us this secret 
was Barnac Elbarameni,2"1' who ended his days in the land of the Hindus; a 
certain part of India is given the name Bayrameny28" after him. Certain sages 
of that people have many workings of diverse kinds, which would prolong our 
book inordinately if we wished to repeat them all. Therefore we return here 
to our proposed course. 
276 
Presumably by the other worshippers. 
277 
Cyprus in the Arabic text. 
278 
Images of the gods; the "house" is clearly a temple. 
279 
Bartim the Brahman in the Arabic text. 
280 
The Arabic text says that the Brahman casre is named after this sage. 
Boob 333 Chapter 
185 
,4, 
Chapter Eight 
The way of prayer with which the Nabateans used to pray to 
the Sun and Saturn, and how they would speak to them and 
their spirits and draw forth their influences 
he Nabatean sages have said that the power and works of the 
heavens and stars are from the Sun originally, and this is because 
they see and understand that the Moon helps him (that is, as 
much as is in her power), while the Sun does not need her effects, nor those 
of the other planets; and similarly, the five other planets follow the Sun 
in their effects and obey and are humbled by him, and proceed in their 
aforementioned effects according to the dispositions of the Sun. In the same 
way, according to their opinion, all their effects are primarily rooted in the 
Sun, and the other six planets help him by their effects. Similarly, the fixed 
stars are the Sun's handmaidens, and serve, obey, and are humbled by him, 
and while they help him with their effects, this is not because of any need that 
he has of them. These people were wont to make this prayer to the Sun: 
"We pray, we honor, and we praise thee, high Lord Sun. For you give 
life to everything living in the world, and the whole universe is illuminated 
with your life and governed by your power. You are seated on high; a great 
kingdom full of light, perception, intellect, power, honor, and goodness 
is yours. All things that generate are generated by your power, all things 
governed are governed by you; by you all plants live, and all things endure in 
their strength through you. You are noble and honorable in your effects, and 
powerful in your enduring heaven. We salute, we praise, and we honor you, 
and we pray in obedience and humility, and reveal all our minds to you, and 
all things necessary to us we ask and require of you. You are our lord, and we 
beseech you that we may perceive your life and governance by day as well as 
by night. We give to you our wills, that you may free and defend those who 
turn to you from our enemies and from all evils, and that this also may be 
done by the Moon, who is your handmaiden and obeys you, and whose light 
and radiance are from you and the virtue that proceeds from you. You are the 
giver of power; you are lord in your chosen heaven. The Moon and the other 
planets serve you always and obey you, and never depart from your precepts. 
May all this likewise always by us be praised unto the infinite age of ages, 
Amen." 
The sages of The Chaldean Agriculture21,1 have said that they prayed to 
Saturn with the following prayer, but they first ascertained that this lord was 
281 
Also known as The Nabatean Agriculture, a primary source for Picatrix. 
184 
JE&e ^atrtt-IUber Hubeua coition 
not descending in the circle nor occidental of the Sun, nor under the Sun's 
rays nor in the midst of his retrogradation. When they found him to be free 
of all impediment and clean, however, they made the following prayer to 
him, and suffumigated with old hides, fat, sweat, dead bats, and mice, of 
which 14 bats were burnt and 14 mice were similarly burnt; and they took 
the ashes and spread them on the head of their image. They prostrated 
themselves around the image on stone or black sand. By this working they 
were protected from Saturn's malice and evil, because from Saturn all evils, 
destructions, and sorrows proceed. He is the lord of all poverty, misery, 
sorrow, imprisonments, sins, and lamentations, and these are signified 
when he is cadent and unfortunate. When he is in good disposition and 
in his exaltation, however, he signifies purity, length of life, exaltation, joy, 
honor, wealth, inheritance, and the transmission of inheritances to sons and 
nephews. His goodness is when he is oriental of the Sun, and when he is at 
the midheaven and in direct motion and swift in motion and elevated in his 
circle and in his increase. 
Zeherit, who was the first sage of the three sages of The Chaldean 
Agriculture, said that he made this prayer to Saturn and asked from him the 
petitions he desired, and at once a certain disposition came over Saturn's 
image, from which he received an answer to what he asked. The way of 
making this prayer is as follows. 
"We stand upright, we pray and we honor you in obedience and 
humility. We stand upright facing this high, living and enduring lord, 
fixed in his power and dominion, who is Saturn. He is enduring in his 
heaven and potent in his lordship and adunate282 in his effects, altitudes, and 
magnificences. He encircles all things, and has power over all things visible 
and invisible, and has power over all that exists on the Earth. By his power 
all living things on Earth live, and by his durability they endure. They begin 
by his power and potency, and he makes them endure, and by his enduring 
permanence and his durability the Earth is made permanent. He makes 
waters and rivers to flow by his power, as they flow away and are moved. 
By his life he makes living things move so that they live. He is cold by his 
nature. By his high rulership trees grow and are raised up, and the earth is 
made ponderous according to the ponderousness of his motion; and if he 
wishes, he makes things other than they are. He is wise and the power of 
things and the maker of perception; and his knowledge extends to all things. 
For you are blessed, you are the lord of your heaven, and your name is holy, 
revered, and honored. We are obedient to you, on our feet we pray to you 
282 
"adunate" literally means "as one"—ad unum—and is a technical term in 
medieval philosophy; the point being made is that Saturn's effects, altitudes, and 
magnificences are all one with his essential nature. 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 85 
127 
and to your honor, by your names, will, nobility and honor we beseech you 
that you will strengthen our senses that they will be enduring and be with us 
throughout our lives, that they will remain as they are, and take pity on our 
bodies when they are separated from live, so that worms and creeping things 
draw back from our flesh. You are the pious and ancient lord, and none but 
you can restore what you have destroyed. You are permanent in your words 
and deeds, nor do you repent of your actions. You are slow and profound in 
your powers. You are so great a lord that no one can take away what you have 
given, and what you prohibit none can allow. You are the lord of your elegant 
works and your unique realm. You are the lord of the other planets, and the 
other stars moving in their circles fear the movement of your voice and shake 
with terror for fear of you. We ask you and we implore you that you will 
keep us safe from your fury and your wrath, and deign to remove from us 
your evil effects, and in your purity have pity on us, and let your good and 
noble names touch your pity, so that we may be able to remove by your power 
all your evil effects, and have pity on us by your virtue as well as ours. By all 
your names, and by your high and noble name, to which you will allow more 
than all your other names—this name281—we pray and ask that you will pour 
out your pity on us." 
The foregoing words were composed by Abenrasia28" in The Chaldean 
Agriculture, which he translated out of the Chaldean language. We have 
repeated this prayer here only to reveal the common agreement of the ancient 
sages concerning planetary workings, and how they at all times protected their 
bodies from the natures of the planets. We have recited this prayer in this 
book to turn people away from this incomprehensible working of the ancient 
sages. We have made this book of ours complete in all that we promised 
to treat in the beginning. Because this prayer is prohibited in our faith, we 
recite it here solely to uncover the secrets of the ancient sages, because it was 
made before the laws against such workings. For that reason none of the 
foregoing ought to be removed from this book, and even as much as I have 
communicated concerning this working and others has been done with good 
intentions. I beseech all who see and hear this book never to reveal it to the 
insensate. If it becomes necessary to reveal any of it, do not do so except to 
those of great wisdom and illuminated minds and those who lead their lives 
according to the commands of order. I supplicate God the Omnipotent: 
keep this work of ours out of the hands of the foolish, and pardon me for all 
that is said here, for I have said all the foregoing with good intentions.21" 
283 
Clearly the highest name of Saturn was originally written here, but was 
omitted. 
284 
This is again Ibn Wahshiyyah. 
285 
Given that the material in this chapter and the latter part of the previous 
one is pure Pagan planet-worship, the author's palpable panic here is understandable 
i86 
Kfyz Picatnr-JLtber Hubeiw dftrttlon 
Chapter Nine 
How to attract the powers of each planet and the powers of their 
spirits, naming them according to their parts, and how to 
accomplish this by speaking their names 
he spirit of Saturn called Redimez2"6 is coadunate with all of his 
names, both collectively and individually, and with his parts which 
are above and below and elsewhere, according to the opinion of 
Aristotle in the book he wrote for Alexander, which is called the Book of 
Antimaquis, in which he discussed the way in which the powers of the planets 
and their spirits ought to be attracted. And their names, listed according to 
Aristotle's opinion, are as follows. The name of the spirit of Saturn above 
is called Toz, below is called Corez, to the right Deytyz, to the left, Deriuz, 
before Talyz, behind Daruz; and its motion in its sphere and its progress 
through the signs and the motion of its spirits—all the aforesaid are united 
in the name Tahaytuc:ir . All of these separate names above are united in the 
primary name, Redimez, and this name is the root and origin of all the names 
we have said. 
The name of the coadunating spirit of Jupiter is Demehuz, the spirit 
above is Dermez, below is Matiz, to the right is Maz to the left is Deriz, in 
front is Tamiz, behind is Foruz and the spirit of his motion in his heaven and 
divided by the signs is Dehydez:"s and the name that is the root and origin of 
all is the primary name we mentioned above, that is Demehuz. 
The name that coadunates the spirits of Mars is Deharayuz, the high 
spirit is Heheydiz, the low is Heydeyuz, the right is Maharaz, the left is 
Ardauz, in front Hondehoyuz, behind is Meheyediz, the spirit of his motion 
in his heaven and his progress through the signs and the movement of his 
spirit is called Dehydemez.-"1' The name that includes all of the aforesaid 
names, and which is the root and origin of the aforementioned, is the name 
named above, that is to say Deharayuz. 
The name that includes all the spirits of the Sun is Beydeluz; and the 
name of the spirit above is Dehymez, below Eydulez, to the right Deheyfuz, 
286 
Barimas in the Arabic version 
287 
These spirits of Saturn in the Arabic text are Tus, Harus, Qajus, Darjus, 
Tamas, and Darus respectively. The Arabic name of the spirit of Saturn's motion is 
Tahitus. 
288 
The Arabic names of the spirits assigned to Jupiter are Damahas, Darmas, 
Matis, Magis, Daris, Tamis, Farus, and Dahidas respectively. 
289 
The Arabic names of the spirits of Mars are Dagdijus, Hagidis, Gidijus, 
Magras, Ardagus, Handagijus, Mahandas, and Dahidamas respectively. 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
87 
to the left, Azuhafez, before Mahabeyuz, behind Hadyz, and the spirit of 
his motion in his heaven, and through the signs, and of his spirit is called 
Letahaymeriz.2'" The name that includes and conjoins all of these names 
(and is the root and origin of the aforedaid) is the name named above, that is 
Beydeluz. 
The name that includes all the spirits ofVenus is called Deydez, her spirit 
above is Heyluz, below Cahyluz, to the right Diruez, to the left Ableymez, 
before Teyluz, behind Arzuz , the spirit of her motion in her heaven and 
progress through the signs and the movement of her spirit is Dehataryz;2'" of 
equal value to all the names we have said (and it is the origin and root of all 
the names aforementioned) is Deydez who has been named above. 
The name that includes all the spirits of Mercury, in turn, is Merhuyez, 
and his spirit above is Amirez, below Hytyz, to the right Cehuz, to the left 
Deriz, before Maylez, behind Dehedyz, the spirit in the motion of his heaven 
and progress though the signs is Mehendiz.292 The name that includes all the 
names we have said (and it is the root and origin of the aforesaid) is Merhuyez 
named above. 
The name that includes all the spirits of the Moon is Harnuz, her spirit 
above is Hediz, below Marayuz, to the right Meletaz, to the left Timez, before 
Hueyez, behind Meyneluz, and the name of her spirit in the motion of her 
heaven and progress through the signs is Dahanuz.293 The name that joins 
and unites all of the names listed above (and which is the root and origin of 
the aforesaid) is Harnuz listed above. 
Aristotle said all this in the book already mentioned, giving the aforesaid 
spirits the names just given, and asserting that these are spirits of the parts 
of the universe, there being six parts in the climes of the seven planets.294 
The names of these spirits are those that worshippers of the planets were 
accustomed to use, and which they habitually used in the prayers they prayed 
to the planets. You, however, ought to diligently pay attention to what was 
said earlier.2'" 
Next, the philosopher said that from these spirits descend all the spiritual 
potencies of the same kind that come into contact with the climes and 
290 
The Arabic names of the spirits of the Sun are Bandalus, Dahimas, 
Abadulas, Dahifas, Ati'afas, Maganamus, Gadis, and Tahimaris respectively. 
291 
The Arabic names of the spirits ofVenus are Didas, Gilus, Hilus, Dahifas, 
Ablimas, Basalmus, Arhus, and Dahtaris respectively. 
292 
The Arabic names of the spirits of Mercury are Barhujas, Amiras, Hitis, 
Sahis, Daris, Hilis, Dahdis, and Mahudis respectively. 
293 
The Arabic names of the spirits of the Moon are Garnus, Hadis, Maranus, 
Maltas, Timas, Rabis, Minalus, and Dagajus respectively. 
294 
The climes were basic concepts in medieval geography—regions of the earth 
arranged in bands from north to south. 
295 
That is, the passage at the beginning of Book III chapter 7 that warns 
against polytheism. 
i88 
Ei>t PtcatriF-Jliber itCubeus GBDtrton 
the world of generation. By praying to the aforementioned spirits, they 
accomplished miracles—from them, riches and poverty emanated, for they 
gave, took away, and changed the course of these things. They had bodies 
with which they were clad, and were embodied with the same. Each of them 
had human beings in their climes, into whom their powers and spirit flowed, 
and they permitted them to arrange things with these sciences and make use 
of things of their nature. 
Thereafter the same philosopher said this: when you wish to 
summon any of the aforesaid planetary spirits in any clime, attend to the 
aforementioned fundamentals because the effect of each of the planets works 
most powerfully in its own clime. 
The Operation of Saturn. When you wish to work with Saturn, do the 
following. With the Sun in Capricorn and the Moon in Sagittarius,2'"' make 
an image with feet of iron, and wrap it in a garment colored green, black 
and red. Afterwards go into the open and go under trees that lack any odor. 
Make your sacrifice (namely a cow or calf) and suffumigate with a mixture 
of the brain of a black cat, castor, hemlock, myrrh and St John's Wort. Say: 
"Bedimez, Toz, Eduz, Hayz, Derniz, Tayuz, Huaruyz, Talhit, Naycahua, 
Huenadul,297 come, you spirits, here is your offering!" Repeat your prayer 
continually as you suffumigate. Make your petition and it will be fulfilled. 
All of this has been laid by Aristotle in his book. 
Hie Operation of Jupiter. When you wish to work by means of Jupiter, 
do the following in the day of Jupiter,298 the Sun being in Sagittarius or Pisces 
and the Moon in the head of Aries (because this is the exaltation of the Sun). 
And prepare a clean and splendid house, with hangings and curtains and 
cloth goods finely decorated, so that the house may be suitable to the work. 
Take in your hand a dish with a mixture or compote of honey, butter, nut oil, 
sugar, making it smooth and moist. Then make a pastry (that is, a torte) of 
flour, butter, milk, sugar and the most delicate saffron, and make it as large as 
you can. 
In the same house, put a large table in the place of honor, supported by 
a strong tripod. Place before it a censer composed of the metal of Jupiter.299 
On the table place nutmeg, camphor, lignum aloes and other good smelling 
things and civet and the like. Have one measure of mastic, along with the 
pastry you made and the mixture you made, that is, both the wet and the dry. 
In the middle of the table place a large burning candle, and behind the 
296 
The Arabic text specifies that the Moon should be in her 20th Mansion, 
which is between 4° 17' and 17° 8' of Sagittarius. 
297 
These are Barimas, Tus, Harus, Qajus, Gardijus, Tamus, Warijus, Tahit, 
Wasirah, and Wamandu in the Arabic text. 
298 
Thursday. 
299 
This is traditionally tin. 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
189 
candle place four opened pomegranates, and the cooked and roasted flesh 
of a ram, a chicken and a pigeon and fill the dishes full. At the head of the 
table put a jug full of wine and a clear vessel. Above the table place a branch 
of myrtle. When you have done the aforesaid, suffumigate with mastic and 
lignum aloes at the head of the table, and suffumigate with mastic in the 
other parts of the house, and no one should be in the house besides yourself. 
Say the following: "Demuez, Armez, Ceylez, Mahaz, Erdaz, Tamyz, 
Feruz, Dyndez, Afrayuz, Tayhaciedez."3"" These are the all of the names of 
the spirits of Jupiter in six parts of Heaven. The interpretation of the name 
Afriduz and the others following is, "Come and enter, all you spirits of 
Jupiter, and smell the perfumes and eat from this dish and do as you desire." 
Say the preceding seven times. Afterwards go out of your house and stand 
quietly for an hour.3"1 
Then enter your house and repeat the previous prayer again. When you 
have done the work five times, return to the house a sixth time and make 
the aforementioned prayer as we have said, and then the spirits will come in 
beautiful forms wearing ornate garments, and they will receive your petition 
and that which you desire will come into being in the manner you wish, 
and your knowledge and understanding will be assisted and the power of 
the spirits will defend and protect you. When you have done everything 
as ordered above, call together your friends and associates and prepare food 
and eat and drink together and perfume with perfumes and suffumigate 
with suffumigations. This is the prayer of the planets that the Roman sages 
themselves were accustomed to make each year, and especially for Jupiter. 
The Operation of Mars. When you wish to work by means of Mars, do 
the following in the day of Mars,3"2 the Sun being in Aries, which is the house 
of Mars, and the Moon in her 23rd Mansion,3"3 in which is is the exaltation 
of Mars. Do this at the end of winter when the trees begin to fruit. Take 
with you a cow or sheep as sacrifice, and fill an incense burner with charcoal 
and suffumigate with myrrh, aspand seed and sarcocolla/"' and provide a full 
dish (that is, a dish as good as you are able to make) and fill a pitcher full of 
wine. As we have said before, you should carry everything to a field, under a 
tall tree, and offer up the sacrifice in both hands, and light the fire in which 
the suffumigation will be burnt. Say these words: "Dahaydanuz, Hahaydiz, 
300 
These are Dahamus, Armas, Hilis, Magas, Adris, Tamis, Farus, Dahidas, 
Afrawas, and Ki'aqiras in the Arabic version. 
301 
This is not necessarily an hour by the clock; the medieval sense of time was 
less exact than ours. "A long while" might be a better translation. 
302 
Tuesday. 
303 
This is Sa'ad al Bulah, 12° 51' to 25° 42' Capricorn. 
304 
Sarcocolla is a resin from African shrubs of the genus Penned, popular in the 
Middle Ages as incense. 
190 
C&e Wattv-Wbet 
Kubeu* (EOttfon 
Hayadayuz, Mihyraz, Ardahuz, Heydaheydez, Mehenediz, Dehydemez."w 
This is the oration of Mars. And when you have said that, say this: "This 
sacrifice is yours, spirits of Mars. Accept this and consume it and do as you 
desire." 
Afterwards take the sacrifice to another place away from the tree, and 
suffumigate it with the suffumigation already described, and cut off the head 
of your sacrifice and cut off the skin and remove the liver and roast it. Put 
all of it on a tray and cover it with the skin; and offer it as a sacrifice in the 
same place and say the prayer. Then pray in this way: "O spirits of Mars, this 
sacrifice is yours. Come and smell this suffumigation, and do as you will with 
this sacrifice and food." Then a red spirit like the flame of a fire will descend, 
and he will go to the food and consume a portion of it with fire. 
As soon as you see the spirit, ask for what you wish and you will 
be assisted in all of your works. When the flames are gone, take the 
aforementioned food and eat as much as you are able, similarly drink as 
much wine as you can, and ask whatever you wish of the petitions pertaining 
to Mars. You should know that Mars is a diverse planet that is strong in its 
nature, and does not receive or respond to petitions every time. Therefore 
when doing the magical works of Mars, even when the aforesaid events do 
not happen, by no means despair. As soon as you have carefully done the 
aforesaid, return to your own house. 
The Operation of the Sun. When you wish to do the magical work of 
the Sun, do it on a Sunday, the Sun being in Leo and the Moon in the 15th 
or 19th degree of Aries.** Prepare an appropriate house that is clean and 
bright, and ornament it with the costliest cloth you have. Place in it seven 
golden images, and if you are not able to make them of gold, then you may 
use wood. If they are made of gold, put jewelry of red jacinths and pearls 
on them, and if the images are made of wood, wrap them in clothing of red 
silk and put on them jewels of gold and red jacinth. Place the images in the 
middle of the house, and before whichever image you please, place a table. 
Place on the table, wherever you like, pastries made from wheat flour 
that has both wet and dry portions, and somewhere in the middle of them 
place a pitcher of wine, and around the table, vessels with many different 
types of pleasant smelling things such as nutmeg, camphor and amber, and 
place myrtle in the house. Afterwards light a large wax candle, and place it 
on something high that will place it before the images, and say: "Tebdeluz, 
Dihymez, Andulez, Dehycayz, Aginafez, Mahagnuz, Ahadyz, Tuymeryz.",":' 
305 
These are Dagidus, Hagidus, Gidijus, Magdus, Ardagus, Hidagidis, 
Mahandas, and Dahidamas in the Arabic text. 
306 
These are the degrees of the Sun's exaltation in Aries. 
307 
These are Bandalus, Dahimas, Abadulas, Dahifas, Ati'afas, Maganus, Gadis, 
and Tahimaris in the Arabic text. 
Boob 333 C&apter 
10 
20} 
And when the aforesaid has been spoken, make your petition for what you 
propose to ask for. When this is done, call together some of your friends and 
acquaintances and eat the food and drink the wine. Afterwards they should 
leave the house, because then you can petition the spirits of the Sun and they 
will hear you clearly. 
Hie Operation ofVenus. When you wish to do the magical works of 
Venus, do it in the day ofVenus, the Sun being in the beginning of Pisces and 
the Moon in Cancer. Clean yourself and bathe, and when you are cleaned 
and bathed, go to where there are figs or palms and take with you a ram. Say, 
"Hueydez, Helyz, Hemyluz, Deneriz, Temeyz, Cemluz, Arhuz, Meytaryz."'08 
When you have said this, ask for what you wish. But beware that you do not 
ask for something attributed by nature to another planet. 
The Operation of Mercury. When you wish to do the magical works of 
Mercury, work in the day of Mercury, with the Sun in Capricorn, because the 
year of the Chaldeans begins then. Sit in a gold throne in an empty house, 
and suffumigate yourself with lignum aloes, incense, myrrh, hemlock and 
elecampane. Put a golden table before you, and around it place seven male 
goats, which you shall discipline with a wooden rod so that they cry out. 
As the smoke of the suffumigation rises, say: "Barhurez, Emirez, Haytiz, 
Cociz, Deriz, Heniz, Deheriz, Zahudaz.""'1' And when the aforesaid has been 
said, cut the heads off the goats, skin them and cut them apart and place 
them around the table, while continue to suffumigate with the suffumigation. 
When this has been done, cover your entire face except for your eyes, and 
continue to suffumigate. Afterwards go out from that house and carry all of 
the meat you have cut, and cook it with chickweed and vinegar, and get bread 
made with wheat flour. When this is done, put everything in a basket and 
save the best of it. Ask for appropriate things in your petition to Mercury. 
The Operation of the Moon. When you wish to do the magical works 
of the Moon, do so when the Sun is in Cancer and the Moon in Aries, which 
is the exaltation of the Sun, and do the work in the night of the Moon (that 
is, on Sunday, when the day has ended) "1'. When the Sun sets, go to a field. 
Then wash and clean yourself very well, and take a ram and a suffumigation 
of frankincense, hemlock, elecampane, myrrh and lignum aloes mixed 
together. Your friends and associates should go with you, and some of them 
should lead the aforesaid ram and bring the suffumigation, and they should 
likewise bring food in baskets. When this is done, they should light a large 
308 
These are Didas, Gilus, Hamilus, Damaris, Timas, Samlus, Arhus, and 
Hataris in the Arabic text. 
309 
These are Barhujas, Amiras, Hatis, Sahis, Darajas, Hatis, Dahris, and 
Magudis in the Arabic text. 
310 
Planetary days normally begin at dawn, but Arabs and Jews both begin the 
day at sunset; here the standard practice has been changed to fit the Semitic custom. 
I92 
C&e ^HcatriF-Jlfljer Uubeiw tuition 
fire of wood, and put the baskets of food around the hearth. 
One of them who is taking part in your petition should rise up, and 
find a place by some spring of water, with a fig tree before it and nearby the 
ram that he has led there. He should put the suffumigation, which he has 
brought with him, into a fire. He then says: "Hedyuz, Denediz, Mubrynayz, 
Miltaz, Tymez, Rabyz, Celuz, Deheniz, Merniz."3" When he has said this, 
cut off the head of the ram. Then your associate who led the ram should 
go away, because if anyone approaches you, you must kill them, cutting off 
their heads, saying the same words one at a time, and suffumigating with the 
suffumigation.3'2 
When this is done, you should leave, and go back to where the fire is 
burning. Then you and all your friends may return to the place where the 
ram was killed, and skin it, and take its skin, head, feet, and entrails to a clean 
place, where no other animal can eat any of the aforesaid parts, and bury 
them. Roast the ram, and when it is well roasted, put it amidst the circle of 
baskets of food around the hearth. When dawn is near, put out many-colored 
cloths under the fig tree, and when this is done suffumigate with the aforesaid 
suffumigation. And say the oration of the spirits and ask for your petition, 
and all of it will be fufilled. 
Chapter Ten 
A demonstration of the confections of planetary spirits, and preventing 
dangers from ceremonies and effects, and of the wonders of magic, and 
of the food, suffumigations, unguents, and odors that one who invokes 
planetary spirits ought to use; and the proper effects, and works that are 
not done except in appearance 
ristotle, in the Book of Antimaquis already mentioned, which he 
composed for King Alexander, recounted the confection of four 
stones, which have miraculous spiritual powers and effects. 
Hie first of these is named Rayetanz. Whoever carries this stone with 
him in a battlemented ring313 will receive the humble obedience of men 
311 
These are Gadnus, Hadis, Maranus, Malcas, Timas, Rabis, Minalus, 
Dagajus, and Garnus in the Arabic text. 
312 
Ritual taboos of this kind were not uncommon in ancient Greek rituals 
connected with the Mystery cults—one of many elements of this chapter that show 
clear signs of descent from Hellenistic Pagan religion. 
313 
That is, a ring with a bezel shaped like the top of a castle tower. 
ilBoofc 333 Chapter 10 
'9? 
and of every other living thing possessing a spirit; and if he seals any letter 
with this stone and sends it to any kings or any other men, when it is seen 
by them, at once they will tremble and obey it, and unfailingly accomplish 
whatever the letter requests. It will also make men perverse if it is transmitted 
in the same way as given above. 
This stone is red in color, and its composition is as follows. Take three 
ounces of rubies; grind them and cover them with 1/2 ounce of diamonds, 
one ounce each of lead filings and magnesia, 1/2 ounce sulfur, and two 
ounces of gold. Let all the aforesaid be mixed in a crucible and put on a gentle 
fire, increasing it little by little until all the aforesaid ingredients fuse, for the 
rubies will be melted by virtue of the diamond, the diamond by virtue of the 
magnesia, and the magnesia by virtue of the sulfur, and gold also fuses with 
them. When they are well blended, take the crucible off the fire and allow it 
to cool. You will find one body, completely blended, and of a turbid color; 
then leave it. 
Then take equal parts lion brains, leopard fat, and wolf blood. Liquefy 
the fat, and mix it with the brains; then pour the blood into it, and it will 
take on a spotted color. Be careful that you do not touch it with your hands, 
nor get your clothing near it, and keep your face turned away from its odor, 
for it is a deadly poison in all its qualities, from the specific form according to 
the opinion of Cetras, who saw it in a dream. When it is still, take it off the 
fire. 
Then take burnt copper, crocus, and yellow and red sulfur, ten ounces 
each. Let then be pulverized and cleaned, and then add them to the foregoing 
poison. At once its harmfulness will be broken, and the whole of it will be 
liquefied. When it is all melted and mixed together, put it in a jug or small 
vessel, which should be sealed up with alchemists' luting;31'' and put it on a 
gentle fire. When all of it has melted like wax, take it off the fire and allow it 
to cool. Then melt the first body, which should be combined with its spirit3'5 
little by little, until it is all blended and becomes one body. From it, make 
round pebbles of the desired size on a lathe, for Aristotle said the following to 
Alexander: O Alexander, know that this is a miraculous body that conquers 
everything. 
The second stone is named Helemetiz. This stone is to be made against 
rain, hail, and snow; for when any of these is about to fall, raise this stone 
upon your right hand, and you will be safe from them. This stone is spotted 
in color, and it is made in the following way. Take four ounces of hellebore 
314 
In the days before rubber stoppers, alchemists sealed the lids on their flasks 
with fine clay, or luting, that was baked solid by the heat of their furnaces and made 
an effective sealant. 
315 
The first part of the confection, made from minerals, is the bqdv of the 
stone; the second, made largely from biological materials, is the spirit of the stone. 
i 94 
SEtje Picatrip-HLiber Hubeiw CDitton 
and melt it with white soapwort on the fire. When it is melted, put four 
ounces of silver and four ounces of lead into it. When all this is melted 
together, take it off the fire and work with the spirit of the work. 
Take bones from the forefeet and hind feet of a pig, which have been 
well cleaned of flesh and tendons, and cook them well in salt water; when 
they are well cooked, take them off the fire and dry them to remove the 
water. Pulverize them and put them in an earthen vessel with equal parts 
of mandrake and lime, sealed up well with alchemists' luting and properly 
arranged—that is, in the vessel put down a layer of mandrake and lime, then 
on top of it a layer of powdered bone, and so successively until the vessel 
is full. Melt all this by cooking it for one night on a fire of manure. Then 
remove the aforesaid vessel from the fire, and allow it to cool. Powder the 
contents and add to them a little clear red copper. Then grind them again, 
sprinkling them with human blood from a vein, and let it be ground for an 
entire day; and save it for use. 
When you have finished, melt the first body, and add to it this second 
body a little at a time, until the two are fully blended into one another. 
When this is done, take it off the fire, and let it cool, and you will find its 
color to be spotted. This stone may then be worked on a lathe to the desired 
size in a spherical form. Thereafter you should labor at this work with the 
words and ceremonies that we have given already in the ritual of Perfect 
Nature. When you see rain, snow, hail, and thunder in any place, and you 
wish to send it away from yourself and the place where it is, say the words we 
have said before, and raise your right hand, holding that stone, toward the 
sky; and all the aforesaid will be stilled. This stone is composed of the powers 
and spirits of spiritual things. 
The third stone is named Astamatis. Aristotle says that this stone is 
one of the wonders of the world, for whoever carries it with him in a fight 
or battle will remain safe from harm from enemies, and from their offensive 
weapons—not only himself, but also his companions. The composition of 
this stone is as follows. 
Take ten ounces of iron melted in sulfur, and melt it in the fire, and into 
the sulfur put white magnesia stone and borax, all well powdered, until they 
are all blended into one. First it will appear yellow, then white like silver, but 
even more beautiful, and its body will be soft. After this take pork fat and pig 
brains in equal amounts. Melt them together, mix with the blood of a black 
crow, and let it cool, so that it coagulates by the normal way of coagulation. 
Then take four ounces of magnesia stone, 1/2 ounce of burnt diamond, two 
ounces of clear red copper, and four ounces of yellow sulfur; grind them all 
together into powder, and put the powder on the aforementioned coagulated 
body. 
Boob 333 chapter 10 
>95 
Let it all be put into an earthenware vessel of appropriate size, and sealed 
well with alchemist's luting. Thus prepared, let it be put on the fire and 
completely melted like wax. Then take it from the fire, and allow it to cool. 
It will coagulate, and take on the form of a stone; set this aside. Then take ten 
ounces of iron processed in the way already mentioned, and one ounce each 
of gold, silver, and copper. Put them on the fire and melt them until they are 
well mixed. When this is done, cast the other body you have already made 
onto it, little by little, until they are entirely blended; and let it be purified 
by fire. The moisture of the bodies will be removed, and then will be united 
with one another and will be made very slippery. 
When you see that this has happened, remove it from the fire and allow it 
to cool. You will find that the bodies have united into one and become a little 
soft. You may work this on a lathe, and make round stones of any desired 
size, and you should work on them for three days with the words we have 
already mentioned. You should always keep this stone with you and carry 
it during war, and you will be preserved against all the iron weapons of your 
enemies—you and all that accompany you, while you have the aforesaid stone 
with you. 
Hie fourth stone is called Handemotuz. Aristotle said that this stone 
exists to awaken the love of women, and is composed so that by it, for 
example, soldiers and warriors who ought to be engaging in battle will seek to 
mingle with women instead, so their bodies may be made weaker, and that in 
consequence they will be more easily vanquished. This stone is white in color. 
It is compounded in this way. 
Take ten ounces of lead, one ounce each of copper and iron melted with 
sulfur, and 1/2 ounce of silver. Melt the copper, iron, and silver all together, 
then put in the lead. When all this is blended together, take 1/2 ounce each 
of magnesia, diamond, and yellow sulfur, and two ounces of red copper. 
Powder them all, and add the powder to the melted substances until all has 
been absorbed. Then take this of the fire, and set it aside. 
Then make the spirit in this way. Take equal parts of gazelle fat and the 
brains and marrow of a horse. Melt the fat and mix it with the brains and 
marrow, and then put sparrow blood in it until it coagulates. Then take one 
ounce of pig bones, and powder it with a little of the best borax, 1/2 ounce 
of magnesia, one ounce of yellow sulfur, and 11/2 ounces of red copper, and 
mix them together into a mass, and add it to the aforesaid marrow and fat. 
Put it on the fire until all of it has melted together. Then take it off the fire 
and allow it to cool. 
When it has cooled, take the body you made first, and melt it on the 
fire. Put the medicine into it little by little until all has been absorbed, and 
all of it begins to simmer. Then take it off the fire and let it cool, and it will 
C&e Picatrir-JLCber Ktibems cftrttton 
become a stone, which you may make spherical and equal on a lathe. Then 
work for three days using the words we have already mentioned. Then make 
two images of copper, one in the shape of a man and the other in that of a 
woman, and put the stone in the male image. Let these images be placed 
back to back. 
Take an iron needle, and say over it the words we have already given. 
When this is done, thrust it into the chest of the female image until the image 
is entirely pierced through to the back, and let it be pressed into the male 
image so that the two images are pinned together. Put the images prepared 
in this way into a tightly closed iron box, and over it, day and night, say the 
words we have given above. Keep it with you, for you and all your associates 
will thus be completely free of any desire for women. 
Aristotle relates all of the foregoing in the aforementioned Book of 
Antimaquis. The mixtures of which all these stones are made are deadly 
poisons, and whoever makes these stones must carefully avoid touching or 
smelling them. The remedy for this poison, by which these things may be 
done without fear, is made in this way. Take two ounces each of aloes wood, 
myrtle seed, mandrake seed, and centaury seed, 1/2 ounce nutmeg, and one 
ounce each of chaste tree, cleaned raisins, and white sandalwood. Mix them 
together and pulverize them well, and blend them with the juice of myrtles, 
and make them into pills, which you should allow to dry. Whenever you 
wish to compound the aforementioned stones, which are deadly poisons, take 
these pills and put them in your nostrils, ears, and mouth, and cover your 
entire face with a cloth while the foregoing are powdered and worked. 
You will also need another remedy for the preservation of your hands, 
which is this. Take equal parts of laurel seeds and the kernel of basil seeds, 
and four parts each of balsam and rabbit's blood. Grind what can be ground, 
and mix this with the balsam and rabbit's blood. You should have this 
medicine with you in all the foregoing operations, and wash your hands in it 
while working, and you will be able to work safely and without danger. 
In the aforementioned book, Aristotle also says that spirits sometimes 
attack the workmen who perform the foregoing, destroying their natures. 
If you wish to free them from this infirmity so that their natures may be 
brought back to their proper quality, give them the following medicine to 
drink. Take 1/2 ounce of human blood, and mix it with four ounces of oil 
of bitter almonds and two ounces of rabbit brains or marrow, and let these 
be mixed with one ounce of donkey's urine. Combine the foregoing; and 
once each day, on an empty stomach, for nine days, give this in a drink to 
the patient. By this medicine they will be cured, and their nature rectified, 
and evil planetary spirits of every kind driven away from them, so that their 
5IBoob 333 Chapter 10 
'97 
natural complexion may be restored to lasting strength."6 
Again, in the book named Malatiz, Aristotle says the following. When 
Alexander inquired of Caynez, a sage of India and a master of marvels in 
this art, he composed this book Malatiz out of the knowledge of Caynez 
himself, in which he recounted the wonders done by this Caynez, who was 
considered a spirit in human form, and who lived for 840 years. This was in 
the time of King Aydeneruz, who was a mighty man and a murderer. This 
sage made great marvels from composites of the greater and lesser worlds, and 
his words were composed by the spirits that are in the composite world."" He 
controlled the will of the aforementioned king and of any other kings that he 
wished. He also used to make marvels and diverse prayers, which I will relate 
presently. 
For acquiring the love of a woman. This confection he called Deytuz, 
and its composition is as follows. Take 1/2 ounce each of gazelle marrow and 
beef fat. Melt them together, and add 1/2 ounce each of camphor and rabbit 
brain. Let all these be put into an iron vessel for the aforesaid melting, and 
add the powdered camphor last. When it is all mixed together, take it off the 
fire. Then make an image out of virgin wax, which has not been used for any 
other purpose, and have in mind the woman whom you desire. 
In the mouth of that image make an opening that penetrates to the belly 
of the image, by which the melted medicine above may be poured into the 
belly of the image. While pouring it, say: "Dahyeliz, Hanimidiz, Naffayz, 
Dabraylez.""8 Then put into its mouth two ounces of fine sugar. 
Next, take a fine silver needle and insert it into the chest of that image 
until it comes out the back. While you place the needle in this manner, say: 
"Hedurez, Tameruz, Hetaytoz, Femurez.""1' When this is finished, wrap the 
image in a white cloth, and over this put another silk cloth, white in color, 
and prepare a silk thread, and tie this tightly under the chest of the image, 
and let the two ends of the thread be joined together and knotted with 
seven knots. Over each of the knots say these words: "Hayranuz, Hedefiuz, 
Faytamurez, Arminez."'-" 
Then put the image in a little clay pot, which you should seal up with 
alchemist's luting. Make a pit in the house where the person lives against 
316 
This passage conceals a breathtaking ruthlessness, as oil of bitter almonds 
contains cyanide; four ounces daily for nine days would be more than enough to 
kill the patient. Presumably the point of the passage is to allow the book's owner to 
employ workmen for these alchemical workings without any risk that they would be 
able to duplicate the formulae later. 
317 
That is, the world of matter, composed of the four elements. 
318 
In the Arabic text, these are Dahjajas, Gananmawadas, Naqagajas, 
Dirulajas. 
319 
In the Arabic text, these are Haduras, Timarus, Hanitus, Wamiras. 
320 
In the Arabic text, these are Argunas, Hadamijus, Finuras, Armitas. 
198 
HZfje Picatrir-Hliber Uubeu* CEDition 
whom, or at the request of whom, this working is performed—that is, in 
whichever house or place is suitable. Bury the image there, head up, and 
cover it with earth. Then take two ounces each of incense and galbanum,321 
and cast it on the fore. While the smoke rises, say: "Beheymerez, Aumauliz, 
Menemeyduz, Caynaurez.322 I move the spirit of this woman N. and her will 
toward this man N. by virtue of the spirits I have named, and by the virtue 
and power of the spirits Beheydraz, Methurez, Auleyez, Nanitaynuz."323 
When you have done the foregoing, return to the house. You should 
know that all the spirit and will of the woman against whom this working 
is done will be moved toward the man for whose sake the work is done, nor 
will she be able to rest or sleep or do anything else until she obeys the man 
for whom such a working has been done, and this is by virtue of the spirits of 
the foregoing image. This woman will be led to the house where the image is 
buried by the aforesaid virtue. 
Another confection for the same purpose, to be given in food. Take 
two ounces each of rabbit rennet32,1 and wolf brains, three grains of melted 
beef fat, two grains each of amber and nutmeg, three grains of camphor, two 
ounces of the blood of that person who is the agent (that is, for whom the 
working is done). Put this blood in an iron vessel on the fire to heat. When it 
is hot, add the other medicines to it, and mix them all. Then remove it from 
the fire, and mix it with wine or honey or with a dish of meat or fowl or any 
other dish you wish. 
While you do the foregoing, keep your mind intently on the woman for 
whom you are doing it. Then take a little incense and an equal amount of 
galbanum, and cast them into fire. While the smoke rises, say: "Ye Deyluz., 
Menydez, Catrudiz, Mebduliz, Huenehenilez.32' I move the spirit and will of 
this woman N. by virtue of these spirits and this composition, and I move her 
spirit and will by a restless motion whether in waking or sleeping, in walking, 
standing, or sitting. Nor shall she have any rest until she obeys these spirits 
whom I name: Hueyheyulyez, Heyediz, Cayimuz, Hendeliz."32'' When you 
have done the foregoing in the manner specified, give all of the food to eat 
to whomever you wish, so that nothing remains of it. When the aforesaid 
321 
Galbanum: the resin of an Asian plant, Ferula galbaniflua, which was used 
as an incense 
322 
In the Arabic text, these are Bahimaras, Umaralis, Qadamidus, Finuras. 
323 
In the Arabic text, the first three names are Haturas, Maljuras, Ulijas; the 
last is uncertain. 
324 
Rennet: the powdered stomach of an animal, used to curdle milk for 
cheese. 
325 
In the Arabic text, these are O Dilus, Ahidas, Batrudalis, Bandulis, 
Wajagilas. 
326 
In the Arabic text, the last three of these names are Hajadis, Qidamus, 
Andalis; the first is partly illegible. 
Booh 333 Chapter 10 
medicine reposes in her stomach, she will not be able to be still—rather, she 
will be moved with a strong motion—and she will come obediently to the 
place of your choosing. 
If it should happen, because of some difficult, that there is no way for you 
to give this to the woman in food or drink, take the confection as prepared 
above, and in place of the blood mentioned above, use the blood of the one 
against whom you operate. Mix it all together very well. Put it into food or 
drink as before, and put it into a jug with your own hands. 
Take two ounces each of incense and galbanum, and suffumigate 
with them. While the smoke rises, say: "Adyeruz, Metayruz, Beryudez, 
Fardaruz.327 I move the spirit and will of this woman N. toward this man 
N., and by all spirits and wills and hearts I move her so that she cannot be 
quiet or calm in waking or sleeping, speaking, sitting, or standing, until she 
is obedient to N. and fulfills his desire completely. I attract the spirit of her 
heart and move her toward this man N. by virtue of these spirits: Vemedeyz, 
Audurez, Meyurneyz, Sandaruz."3211 
After this, give the aforementioned to be eaten by the one for whom 
this working is done. When he has eaten it and it has descended into his 
stomach, instruct him to take two ounces each of incense and galbanum in 
his hand and cast then upon fire, and suffumigate with them. While the 
smoke rises, have him say these names: Hamurez, Heydurehiz, Heldemiz, 
Hermeniz.32'' When he has said these, tell him to say: "By these names let the 
will of the one for whom this operation is done be attracted. Let her come 
to me with great love and obedienceso that my will and command shall be 
fulfilled." 
The same sage says further that is you are unable to get the blood of the 
woman, take two ounces each of wolf's blood and cow's blood, and mix them 
in an iron vessel upon the fire, as we have described above. Put into it two 
grains of rabbit marrow, three grains of wolf's marrow, and four grains of beef 
fat, all melted and mixed together. Add two grains each of nutmeg, camphor, 
and rabbit rennet, and when all this has melted, mix it well and take it off the 
fire. Give this mixed into drink or food. Then suffumigate with incense and 
galbanum. 
While the smoke rises, say these words: "Animurez, Maphueluz, Fenuz, 
Fadrulez.3311 I move the heart, spirit, and mind of this woman N. toward this 
man N., and I move her spirit, forbidding her to sleep so that she cannot 
have any rest in waking, sleeping, staying, going, or arising. I move her 
327 
In the Arabic text, these names are Adirus, Batirus, Barjudis, Fardarus. 
328 
In the Arabic text, these names are Madis, Uduruas, Manurajas, Handarus. 
329 
In the Arabic text, these names are Hamuris, Tidurahas, Inamas, Harmas. 
330 
In the Arabic text, these names are Anamuras, Habwalus, Fanis, Badrulas. 
200 
C&e Wvcattivllfbtt 
IttHbeu* CDitlon 
spirit and will and lead her to N. by virtue of the spirits written hereunder: 
Hueytayroz, Beryenuz, Aunuhiz, Andulez."331 When you have done, this, give 
it to eat to whomever you wish. When it is in his stomach, take two ounces 
each of incense and galbanum and hair from a wolf's tail, with which you 
should suffumigate the man who ate the foregoing, sayng these names written 
below, which I will teach you: Heyudez. Maherimeyz, Taydurez, Umeyruz.33-
When you have done this, know that the spirit and nature of the woman 
toward whom this operation is done will be moved with a great love for that 
man, and her desires likewise; and she will not be able to find rest in anything 
until she has come with a humble attitude toward that man. 
Another confection, that is, a suffumigation for love. Take two ounces 
each of wolf vulva and rabbit penis, one ounce of the eyes of white mice, 
two ounces each of the fat of a white dog, incense, and galbanum; and beef 
fat of a weight equal to all the foregoing, melted in an iron vessel; put into 
this all the foregoing ingredients. When they are all blended together, take 
1/2 ounce of camphor, one once each of white sandalwood and aloes wood, 
1/2 ounce of amber, and 1/4 ounce of nutmeg. Powder them and add them 
to the aforementioned confection, and blend well together. When this is 
done, let it be divided into seven equal parts. Take seven thuribles full of 
burning coals, which you should set in front of you in a straight line, and in 
each of them put a seventh part of the confection you made as just described. 
While the smoke rises from the thuribles, say: "Ahayuaraz, Yetaydez, Ahariz, 
Aharyulez.333 1 move the heart, spirit, and nature of this woman N. toward 
this man N., forbidding her any rest or sleep, and that she shall have no peace 
in sleeping, waking, or sitting, or in any other action, until she comes to 
him obediently to obey his pleasure and command. I attract and draw her 
spirit toward him by virtue of these spiritual spirits:134 Alhueriz, Heyemiz, 
Huetudiz, Tauediz."33"' When you have done this, return to your home. The 
aforesaid woman will come there, and will be obedient to his good pleasure 
and command. 
Again, another for the same purpose, to be smelled. Take two grains 
of rabbit rennet, and one grain of a male goat's liver, and add powdered 
incense. Put it on the fire, and let it roast until all its moisture has left it 
entirely. Then take it with iron tongs, and cut it to small pieces with a knife, 
and let it be pressed in a pot until all the water leaves it; this water should be 
set aside in a glass vessel. When you wish to work with the foregoing, take 
331 
In the Arabic text, these names are Tirulis, Barjanus, Ubuhis, Wandulas. 
332 
In the Arabic text, these names are Hanudis, Mahrijas, Tiduras, Umirus. 
333 
In the Arabic text, these names are Ajuras, Jatandas, Ahjulas, Harjulas. 
334 
Spiritual spirits: spirituum spiritualium in the text. The phrase is just as 
strange in Latin as it is in English. 
335 
In the Arabic text, these names are Albawaris, Hajaqus, Wabudis, Tawadus. 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
201 
two grains of the aforesaid water, three grains of nutmeg, and four grains of 
amber. Put all these on a charcoal fire in an iron vessel until it is all melted 
and blended together. Add to it a single grain of the confection from the glass 
vessel, and then melt until it is entirely blended and mixed together; then 
take it from the fire and put it again in a glass vessel. When you wish to work 
with it, take one ounce of fine and very pure oil of amber, which you should 
put on the fire in an iron vessel, and add a single grain of the confection from 
the glass vessel, which you should melt until it is entirely blended and mixed 
together.336 
When this is done, take two ounces each of incense and galbanum, and 
suffumigate with them. As the smoke rises, say: "Yetayroz, Maharahetym, 
Faytoliz, Andoraruz.3-17 I move the heart of this woman N., her spirit and her 
will toward this man N., and I move the spirit of her heart toward him with 
love and desire, forbidding her sleep, rest, and tranquility, so that she will not 
have any peace in sleeping, waking, rising, or sitting. I attract and draw her 
spirit and will toward him by virtue of these spiritual spirits: Hueyquitayroz, 
Hedilez, Menueriz, Meyefurez."33" When you have said the foregoing, take the 
aforementioned oil, and (if you can) anoint with it the woman for whom the 
aforesaid working is done. If you cannot do this, put it on something from 
which its odor shall arise, so that she for whom the working is done will smell 
it. At once, when she is anointed by this or smells it, her spirit and will by a 
strong motion will be moved with a strong love and desire toward the man 
for whose benefit this working was done, and she will have no peace either 
sleeping or waking or resting in anything hntil she comes to him, obedient 
and tame. 
If it so happens that you cannot give this to her by means of its odor, 
make an image of wax formed in her likeness, which you should give to the 
man, so that he may hold it in his hands. Suffumigate it with incense and 
galbanum for three days successively, that is, at the rising of the Sun, repeating 
the words given above and suffumigating with the suffumigation, and anoint 
yourself with the oil mentioned above. When you have done everything in 
this manner, her spirit and will will be moved toward him with love. 
If you wish to do the foregoing in another way, take myrtle branches or 
those of another sweet-smelling tree such as apple, and anoint them with two 
grains of the aforementioned compounded medicine. Suffumigate them with 
incense and galbanum. While you suffumigate, say these words: "Neforuz, 
Hemiruliz, Armulez, Feymeriz.33' I move the heart of this woman N. and 
336 
The repetitions in the preceding paragraph are in the original, and may 
involve a scribal error. 
337 
In the Arabic text, these names arc Jatirus, Filiaris, Fitulis, Andarawas. 
338 
In the Arabic text, these names are Qitarus, Adilas, Manluiris, Manquras. 
339 
In the Arabic text, these names are Nurus, Andulis, Arinnlas, Fimaris. 
202 
C&e iPicatriF-iliber Kubew GBtrition 
her spirit and will toward this man N., and I move her spirit and nature 
toward him in love and desire. I take away from her sleep, waking, and rest 
in sleeping, waking, rising, and sitting. I draw and lead her by virtue of these 
spiritual spirits: Venehulez, Mantayriz, Feymulez, Berhunez."M" Then make 
whoever you wish (that is, the woman for whom the working is done) smell 
the odor. When she smells it, her spirit and will at once will be moved by a 
strong motion and great love and desire, so that she will be unable to be still 
or to rest in any way until she comes obediently to the place of the querent 
and fulfills all his desires. 
If you are not able to do this by means of odor, however, make a wax 
image as we said above. Let the agent (that is, he who commanded that this 
working be done) take the image into his hands, and take two ounces each 
of incense and galbanum, which he should cast onto the fire with his own 
hands. Then instruct him to say the words: Heydinez, Beyduriz, Affihuz, 
Deriyenuz."M1 When he smells the oil, at that instant the work is completed. 
At once the spirit and will of the woman for whom the aforementioned work 
has been done, as well as her heart, will be moved by a string motion in great 
love and desire, and she will not be able to rest in any manner of quiet or 
tranquility until she comes obediently to the querents desire, ready and able 
to fulfill his every wish. 
These four images, composed as we have said, are called Decaytus; they 
are those that Caynez the sage recounted for the union of man and woman. 
For acquiring the love of a king. When you wish to attract the love 
of a king and his beneficence toward the people, take virgin wax that has 
not been used for any other purpose, and from it make an image of the king 
whose disposition you wish to influence as just said. Then take 1/2 ounce of 
gazelle brains, one ounce of rabbit brains, and two ounces of human blood; 
mix them together in an iron vessel, and let them be put on the fire until they 
are all mixed. To that mixture add one ounce each of powdered camphor 
and amber, and 1/2 ounce nutmeg, adding these to the first medicine. Leave 
it until all is melted and blended together. Then make a single opening in 
the head of the image, by which you pour the medicine into the belly of the 
image, and then seal up the opening well with wax. 
Then take four ounces each of human blood, the blood of a white rooster, 
and horse brains, 1/2 ounce each of nutmeg and camphor, and two ounces 
of melted beef fat. Let these be combined and held over the fire. Make an 
opening in the throat of the image, pour the mixture into it, and let it cool; 
then close the opening with wax. 
Next take a fine silver needle that is new and has never been used for any 
340 
In the Arabic text, these names are Arulas, Manruras, Fimalus, Barhujas. 
341 
In the Arabic text, these names are Ididas, Biduris, Afius, Darjanus. 
Boob 333 C&apter 10 
20} 
other purpose, and thrust it through the chest of the image so that it does 
not pass into any other part of the image. While you do this, say: "Acriuz, 
Fendeyuz, Nephalez, Feyeduz."342 Then put the image in an earthenware vessel 
and seal it with luting. 
Then take one ounce each of incense, powdered galbanum, and the eyes 
of white roosters, and mix them together. Take the image and the aforesaid 
suffumigation and a thurible, and climb a high mountain, from which you 
can see the king's city; make a pit there the size of the image, and bury it 
there head downward. On the mouth of the pot or vessel put a stone or tile, 
and put earth upon it until it is entirely covered. When this is done, put 
the suffumigation onto the fire, and while the smoke rises, say: "Acderuz, 
Madurez, Feyleuz, Hueryreliz." [Akrarus, Manduras, Filahus, Warmalis] 
Then say: "I turn the heart of this king N. with love, friendship, goodwill, 
and mercy toward this man N. and this people N., by the virtue and power of 
these spiritual spirits: Hueyfeduez, Affimuz, Beefinez, Medariuz." [Naduras, 
Inamus, Kafinas, Madalus] Know that the king will delight in that man or 
that people, and grant to them his favor. 
For generating enmities. He says: a confection to generate enmities, 
which is given in food, and it is this. 
Take 1/2 ounce each of the bile of a black cat and the brains of a pig, two 
ounces of the fat of a black dog, and two grains of sweet myrrh.343 When this 
confection is eaten it attracts spirits of enmity and ill will. 
For the same. Take two ounces of the brains of a black cat, one ounce 
each of pig's bile and brains, and 1/2 ounce each of the penis of a black dog, 
sweet myrrh, and ammoniac. From all these things blended together, make a 
suffumigation, and it will be as above. 
For the same. Take three grains of black dog's bile; two ounces each of 
pig's brains, black cat's bile, pig grease, sulfur, sweet myrrh, black cat's eyes, 
and oil of caubac; two grains of copper, four ounces of the brains of a black 
dog, and one ounce of hair from its tail. If you make a suffumigation from all 
this mixed together, it will generate ill will and enmity. A certain sage worked 
with all these confections, and asserted that he found them to be true. 
That a man may have no desire for women. When you want to do this, 
take 1/2 ounce each of the brains of a black cat and mandrake seeds. Mix 
these two together and blend well. Then make an image of wax, and make a 
hole in the top of his head, into which you pour the confection. Then take an 
iron needle, and into the image (that is, in the place where delight in women 
is) thrust the needle. 
Then take four ounces of pig's blood; two ounces each of rabbit rennet 
342 
In the Arabic text, these names are Aqarjus, Gidajus, Jahilas, Jahidus. 
343 
Sweet myrrh: a Mediterranean herb, Opopanax chironium. 
204 
C&e iPlcatnp-JLfljer Hubeua CDitlon 
and swallow brains; and one pound each cow's milk and myrtle juice Mix all 
these together, and when you wish to take away someone's desire for women, 
give him this to drink, and suffumigate him with incense and galbanum 
mixed together, and it will happen as you desire. 
Chapter Eleven 
The effects of magical images in diverse things, as well as in alterations 
of sight, so that things are seen other than as they are; and causing sleep 
and waking, and making poisons and their remedies 
3
have found the following confections in books written by those who 
were wise in this science, none of which are mentioned by the aforesaid 
Caynez. First, to bind tongues so that nothing evil is said of you. 
V^hen you wish to bind tongues so that they may speak no evil, 
compound the confection that follows. Take the tongues of all the following, 
that is: the tongue of a crow, an eagle, a toad, a water snake, a white dove, 
a white rooster, and a hoopoe.144 Powder all these tongues and mix them 
together. Then take one grain of pearl and 1/2 ounce each of gold, silver, 
camphor, borax, and aloes. Powder all of these and mix them together, and 
add them to the powder described above, and blend the whole mass with 
honey. Then put it in a white silk cloth. 
Then take two hairs from the eye of a hawk, two hairs from the eye of 
a peacock, the liver of a hoopoe, the liver of a chicken, two wing bones of 
a dove, and two wing bones of a hoopoe. Powder all these and blend them 
with milk, and put them in the aforementioned white cloth with the first 
mixture. 
Then make an image of white wax, which you should name with your 
own name; write your name and the figure of the Sun on its head, and 
similarly on its chest write your name and the figure of the Moon. Then 
wrap this image in another white silk cloth, and put it in the midst of the 
aforementioned mixture, and tie it all up with silk thread. Whoever carries an 
image thus prepared with him will behold miracles, nor will anyone be able to 
speak ill of him, and he will be loved and valued by all. 
For love. Take five ounces of gazelle brains, one ounce of leopard blood, 
and two ounces of rabbit rennet. Mix these together and blend well. Give 
344 
These animals correspond to the seven planers in descending order from 
Saturn to the Moon. 
ilBoofe 333 Chapter n 
205 
this mixture in food or drink to whomever you will, and you will be loved by 
that person. 
For the same. Take two ounces of the blood of a white dog and the 
same amount of its brains, and four ounces each of gazelle brains and human 
blood. When this is all mixed and blended, suffumigate whomever you will 
with it, and that person's spirit will be moved toward you in love. 
For the same. Take two ounces each of the brains and blood of a white 
dove and the blood of an eagle, one ounce of rabbit rennet, and 1/2 ounce of 
hawk brains. Mix all these together and blend well. Give some of this in food 
to whomever you will, and you will be loved by that person. 
For the same. Take one ounce each of chicken blood, leopard blood, and 
rabbit rennet, and two ounces of human blood. Blend all this together, and 
add one ounce of eyebright. Suffumigate anyone with this confection, and 
you will be loved by that person, whose spirit and will will be moved toward 
you. 
For the same. Take two ounces each of sparrow blood and brains, one 
ounce each of mouse blood and brains, four ounces of human blood, and 1/2 
ounce of eyebright. Mix them, and give in a drink to whomever you wish. 
For the same. Take the brains of a black cat and human urine, in equal 
parts. Mix them, and give them in food to whomever you wish; and that 
person's spirit and will will be moved toward you in love. 
For the same. Take four ounces each of the blood and brains of a red 
dog, two ounces each of rabbit rennet, dove blood, and chicken blood, and 
one ounce of eyebright. 
Mix all these, and suffumiage with it whomever you 
wish. 
For the same. Take eight ounces of donkey blood, and one ounce each 
of fox blood and hedgehog blood. Mix these well, and to this mixture add 
two ounces of eyebright. Suffumigate with this whomever you wish. 
For generating enmity and discord. These confections are compounded 
for enmity and ill will. Take four ounces of the blood of a black dog, two 
ounces each of pig blood and brains, and one ounce of donkey brains. Mix 
all this together until well blended. When you give this medicine to someone 
in food or drink, he will hate you. 
For the same. Take four ounces each of black cat's blood and chaste tree, 
two ounces each of the brains and blood of a kite, and of fox blood, and four 
ounces of chaste tree. Powder the chaste tree, and then mix it with the others. 
If you suffumigate someone with this, it will expel love from him, and his will 
and spirit will draw back from love. 
For the same. Take fox blood and ape blood, two ounces of each, and 
one ounce each of cat's blood, wolf's blood, ape brains, and pig brains. If you 
mix these together until well blended and give it to someone in food, it will 
206 
C&e PicatriF-Jlibcr Kubeiw Coition 
do the same as above. 
For the same. Take two ounces each of toad brains and crane brains, 
four ounces each of the blood of a red dog and the blood of a black cat; and 
one ounce each of pork fat and the brains of a red dog. Mix all this together 
and add to it four ounces of cinquefoil. With this, suffumigate the person 
you want to hate you. 
For the same. Take four ounces each of human blood and donkey's 
blood, and one ounce of leopard's blood. Mix it all together, and give it in 
food to whomever you wish; and it will do the same as above. 
For the same. Take four ounces each of the blood of a black dog and 
the blood of an eagle, and one ounce of donkey's blood. Heat them, and mix 
with two ounces of chaste tree. Make a suffumigation of this mixture for the 
one you want to feel hatred. 
The following four suffumigations cause enmities, hatreds, and 
depopulations. The first of them is this, take equal parts of blood of a black 
cat, brains of a red dog, and blood of a fox. Mix them together and add to 
them St. John's wort and chaste tree, two ounces each. Suffumigate with this 
whomever you wish. 
The second, for the same. Take four ounces each of pig rennet, pork fat, 
and mouse blood, and one ounce of brains of an arrahama Mix all this, and 
add St. John's wort and cinquefoil in equal parts, making an amount equal to 
the other ingredients. Powder all together, and suffumigate whomever you 
wish. 
The third, for the same. Take eight ounces each of crane brains and kite 
brains, and one ounce each of rabbit brains and blood and donkey fat. Mix 
together, then add an amount of chaste tree equal to the other ingredients. 
Whomever you suffumigate with this will become as above. 
Hie fourth, for the same. Take one ounce each of crow's blood and 
vulture's blood, and four ounces each of donkey fat and blood. Mix together 
and add an amount of chaste tree equal to the other ingredients. Whomever 
you suffumigate with this will become as above. 
For the same. Take four ounces of black cat brains. Powder this, and 
mix it with an equal amount of dried and powdered human feces. Give this 
in food to whomever you wish, and he will hate. 
Aristotle said: "Whoever truly knows and is instructed in the separations 
and unions of spirits and natures, and understands the ordering of the 
macrocosm and microcosm, will know the separations and conjunctions of all 
things with one another, spiritual as well as corporeal." 
345 
Readers who consider these long lists of confections pointless should read 
Book III, chapter 4 again, and then study this quote attributed to Aristotle with the 
greatest care. 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
207 
Here are seven confections that are given to men in food so that they 
cannot perform with women. The first is this. Take two ounces each of 
horse brains, pig fat, and black cat's blood. Mix all these with one ounce of 
powdered colocynth, and give a little of this mixture in food to whomever 
you wish. 
Hie second, for the same. Take horse brains, pig fat, and wolf's blood in 
equal parts. Give half a dram in food to whomever you wish, and it will be as 
said above. 
The third, for the same. Take ape blood and brains, ostrich fat, and the 
eyes, horn, and tongue of deer, all in equal parts. Powder them all and mix 
together, and give 1/2 ounce in food to whomever you wish. 
The fourth, for the same. Take four ounces of donkey brains, one ounce 
of pork fat, and two ounces of horse blood. Mix them all, and give 1/2 ounce 
in food to whomever you wish. 
The fifth, for the same. Take four ounces of powdered pig bones, two 
ounces of persimmon leaves, and two ounces each of burnt wolf hair, black 
cat's eyes, and donkey brains. Mix them all together, and give 1/2 ounce in 
food to whomever you wish. 
Sixth, for the same. Take equal parts of black cat's blood and the brains 
of a sea cow. Mix them, and give 1/2 ounce in food to whomever you wish.""' 
Here are seven confections that will cause sleep and quiet all the 
spirits of the body, and it will be believed that they kill. The first of them 
is this. Take equal parts pig's brain and the brain of a chamois (which is an 
animal like a deer), and add a quantity of mandrake seed equal in weight to 
both. Give 1/2 ounce in food or drink to whomever you wish. 
The second, for the same. Take four ounces of wild black poppy seeds, 
and one ounce each of fox brains, human brains, and pig bile. Mix them, and 
give a little in food to whomever you wish. 
The third, for the same. Take equal parts human sweat and the blood of 
a black cat, and a quantity of mandrake seed of a weight equal to both. Mix 
them, and give 1/2 ounce of it in food to whomever you wish. 
The fourth, for the same. Take 1/2 ounce each of pig's brains and black 
cats blood. Mix them, and give in food to whomever you wish. 
The fifth, for the same. Take equal parts dove brains, pig's blood, and 
grease from the serpent that is called the deaf adder. Mix them, and give 1/2 
ounce in food to whomever you wish. 
The sixth, for the same. Take four ounces of cat urine, two ounces of 
horse sweat, and one ounce of colocynth. Mix them all, and give 3/4 of an 
ounce in food to whomever you wish. 
The seventh, for the same. Take equal parts of the juice of wild rue, 
346 
The seventh confection is omitted in all manuscripts. 
2o8 
Cfje Picatrtr-JLiber Hubetw GEbttion 
human sweat, and pig brains. Mix them all, and give 1/2 ounce in food to 
whomever you wish. This confection kills the virtue of the victim's spirits. 
Here are ten confections that cause sleep and death. In the Book of 
Methedeyhoz, similarly, are found these ten confections that cause sleep and 
death. 
The first of them is this. Take two ounces of coagulated urine of a black 
cat, and one ounce each of mouse brains and chamois brains. Give 1/2 ounce 
in food to whomever you wish. 
The second, for the same. Take equal parts of pig brains, pit sweat, and 
salt of human urine. Mix together, and give in food to whomever you wish. 
The third, for the same. Take two ounces each of ape grease, dog brains, 
and blood of a racan or lagarius (which is a large green lizard). Mix together, 
and give 1/2 ounce in food to whomever you wish. 
The fourth, for the same. Take equal parts donkey brains and human 
sweat. Mix together, and give 1/2 ounce in food to whomever you wish. 
The fifth, for the same. Take human sperm and gazelle brains in equal 
parts, and animal sweat of a weight equal to both. Mix together, and give 1/2 
ounce in food to whomever you wish. 
The sixth, for the same. Take human sweat and gazelle brains in equal 
parts. Mix together, and give 1/2 ounce in food to whomever you wish. 
The seventh, for the same. Take black cat brains, bat brains, and wolf 
grease in equal parts. Mix together, and give one ounce in food to whomever 
you wish. 
The eighth, for the same. Take equal parts mouse brains and black 
crow's blood, and 1/2 part colocynth. Mix together, and give one ounce in 
food to whomever you wish. 
The ninth, for the same. Take two ounces each of bear's bile and brain, 
and one ounce each mouse blood and black cat grease. Mix together, and 
give one ounce in food to whomever you wish. 
Hie tenth, for the same. Take equal parts ape brains and human brains. 
Mix together, and give one ounce in food to whomever you wish. 
These ten confections just mentioned have virtues and powers from the 
planets and fixed stars, by means of the virtues of the things of which they 
re composed, from which, by a certain mixture, a spiritual power results. 
The foregoing are found in the book that is named Hedeytoz,'4" which was 
compiled by Hermes the sage. 
In this book he described a form of composition that causes wonders, and 
repels all witchcraft'48 from men, that is, from those who carry this confection 
347 
This is apparently the same as the Book of Methedeyhoz mentioned 
elsewhere in this chapter. 
348 
Witchcraft: the Latin word in the text is malejicia, the standard medieval 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
209 
with them. 
Against witchcrafts and enchantments of men. Take the spine and 
head of a frog, and grind them together. Put them in a silk cloth with one 
ounce each peony, barberry [aloaxac?] and donkey brains. Let whoever fears 
witchcraft carry this with him, and he will be safe from it. This confection 
was made by Galienus for a certain king who reigned in his time. 
Wonders which are made with things belonging to the human body. In 
the aforementioned book, the same sage said that in the human body are 
many wonders of the works of magic, when one works with them as the sages 
who discovered this science used to do. Among them, Hermes wrote of a 
marvelous confection which displays many wonders, and which is made as 
follows. He used to take an intact human head, freshly killed, and put it into 
a large jug. With it he put eight ounces of fresh opium and enough human 
blood and sesame oil, in equal parts, to cover the aforementioned head; he 
then sealed the jar tightly with luting, and put it on a mild charcoal fire for 
24 hours without interruption. Then he took it from the fire and let it cool. 
He strained the foregoing, keeping his face covered, and found that it had all 
melted to the similitude of oil, which he set aside. 
He said that there were many marvels in that oil, and the first is that 
it allows you to see whatever you want to see. If you light a lamp with the 
foregoing oil, or anoint someone with it, or give a little of it in food to 
someone, you will see whatever you wish. 
To appear in the form of whatever animal you wish. Take the head of 
the animal and its grease, and scialta nuts, using as many of these latter as you 
wish. Cover them with oil in a jug, and put on a gentle fire for a day and a 
night, until all the oil flows from them. When it has cooled, strain it well. If 
you light a lamp with this and anoint someone's face with it, he will appear in 
the form of that animal standing upright. This may be done with the heads of 
diverse animals, and in the same way he will appear as diverse animals. 
For taking away sense and thought. Take the head of a man, freshly 
cut off, and put it in a large pot; and put his spleen., heart, and liver with it. 
Then in the same pot put the heads of the following animals, that is, of a cat, 
a fox, an ape, a chicken, a hoopoe, a crow, a kite, a bat, a goose, a swallow, 
a tortoise, and an owl. Cover them all with oil, and seal the mouth of the 
jar well with luting; put it on a gentle fire, and let it remain there for three 
days and as many nights. Then take it off the fire, and let it cool. Strain the 
foregoing with your face covered, and set aside the oil. 
Then take the bones of the aforementioned heads, and burn them in a 
different oil until they are reduced to powder. Mix the powder with black 
henbane seeds and scialte nuts, and keep this with you for use. When you 
term for the magical curses believed to be employed by witches. 
2IO 
C&e Picatrip-JLtber iiubeiw Caution 
wish to work with the foregoing, give some of the powder to whomever you 
wish, in food or drink, and light three lamps with the oil; you will see it affect 
him. To make your body appear wondrous, take some of the aforesaid oil and 
anoint your face with it. You will begin to illuminate the house by its light, 
and will appear to stand out as though you were something monstrous. 
For sending away sense and memory. Take two ounces each of hawk 
brains, mouse brains, and cat brains, and 1/2 ounce each of sulfur and myrrh. 
Mix it all and leave it to putrefy.34'' When you wish to use it, take 1/2 ounce 
of it and an equal amount of crane feces. Mix them together, and cast them 
onto the fire so that smoke rises from it. Whoever breathes that smoke 
through his nostrils will be possessed by a demon, and will lose his senses and 
memory, and will not be able to tell in what place he is. 
Many other marvels that are made from the human body. In a certain 
book published by Geber the sage, I found many marvels that are made 
from the human body. He says this: I, Geber, have seen that the elements 
accomplish your labors when they are combined; alone, they accomplish 
nothing, because their existence remains in themselves. When they are 
conjoined with one another so that all four are united, I have seen that 
they create and give birth, grow and live. When one of the four is lacking, 
however, I have seen that they cause death, withering, and corruption. I 
begin with man, and first with the head. 
I say that the human brain heals those who have lost their memory, if 
they eat his brain. 
Burnt skull bone, drunk with syrup of squill for nine days, heals 
epileptics. 
Whoever carries a human eye together with a wolf eye cannot by 
hindered by the evil eye or by any wicked tongue. 
Human hair, burnt, powdered, and mixed with laudanum, warms the 
head. 
The saliva of a young man heals scabies if frequently moistened with it. 
If the saliva of a young man or woman is put on the head or mouth of a 
snake, the snake will swiftly die. 
The tongue of a woman helps those who wish to tell lies and compose 
incantations. 
If you wish to steal or carry off something, carry with you the tongues of 
a man and a kite. 
Water of blood imbibed in sublimated azernec makes the azernec enter 
349 
Putrefaction, the act of allowing something to putrefy or ferment, is one 
of the twelve classic alchemical processes. This chapter includes several alchemical 
recipes dealing with the opus nnimnlium or work with animal substances, the most 
secretive of the branches of alchemy. 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
211 
into copper that is melted in the fire.3'0 
Ear wax makes the Sun and Moon swiftly melt or solidify, and with it one 
may make them solid as quickly as with borax,3'1 
Soup made from a human head drunk mixed with brains heals those who 
have lost their minds. 
Shave your fingernails and toenails with a knife of red copper when 
the Moon is in conjunction with Jupiter, and burn them when she is in 
conjunction with the Sun; take powder made from the ashes, and give it in a 
drink to whomever you wish, or sprinkle it on his clothing; he will delight in 
you. 
So that new leprosy or scabies, which is a kind of leprosy, will not 
increase, give the patient in food a powder made from the burnt end of a 
human penis, and it will spread no further. 
Human urine burns every place where it goes. If someone has scabies, 
wash him with it, and he will quickly be healed. 
Human feces dried in the sun, powdered, and put into gold in which 
there is iron corrodes the iron and destroys it, and cleanses the gold. 
Oil of feces softens the Sun and Moon and improves their color.352 
Whoever has a deadly illness in his thighs, let him wash his thighs 
in water of feces that has been distilled three times, and put powdered, 
calcinated feces on it, and he will quickly be healed.3'3 
One who suffers from an acute fever should wash his head with water of 
human blood, and he will be healed. 
When a wound is washed with water of blood, and the calx of the same 
blood is put on the wound, it will be cured.3'4 
All combustion, whether of fire or burning water, if first washed with 
water of feces, and then treated by applying a powder of calcined blood, will 
be healed.'55 
If you see a sick person who cannot be healed by any medicine, wash him 
with water of blood, and his condition will improve. 
350 
Imbibition: the alchemical process of pouring a liquid onto a solid so chat 
the solid absorbs the liquid. Water ofblood is made by distilling human blood. 
351 
The Sun and Moon here, as in alchemical literature generally, are gold and 
silver. 
352 
Oil of feces: the oily part of human feces, extracted by one of several 
alchemical methods. 
353 
The "deadly illness of the thighs" is probably bubonic plague, which 
produces large black boils in the groin. Calcination is another of the twelve standard 
alchemical processes, and consists of subjecting a solid to heat until it is reduced to 
white ash. 
354 
Calx: the white ash resulting from calcination. 
355 
Combustion: in modern medical terms, inflammation, which in medieval 
medical theory could be caused by an excess of choler, the fiery humor, or by one of 
the other three humors that has become adust ("burning"). 
212 
C&e PieatriF-&tber Kiibeiw Coition 
Whoever has great internal dryness in his body, give him water of blood 
to drink, and he will be healed. 
If someone suffers from diarrhea, give him droplets of blood to drink, 
and he will be healed. 
If someone has a quartan fever, take a human arm bone and the topmost 
wing bone of a goose, and have him carry them with him; he will be healed.1,6 
Every man who suffers from nightmares should be washed with water of 
feces, and he will be healed. 
Oil of feces distilled three times and imbibed with an amalgam of the Sun 
and green water of alfadite with dissolved cinnabar water, tinges the Moon 
and other metals.3'7 
A collyrium of human bile heals weeping eyes and cataracts.3'" 
Whoever has a cancer or a fistula should burn blood, and make a calx 
from it, and put the calx on the cancer or fistula; but first wash the place with 
distilled water of blood. 
Human feces dried in the Sun are very strong and sharp, and take away 
rheumatism and disease from horses and other animals, and help the eyes, 
and take away cataracts from the eyes of beasts. 
Women's menstrual blood given to a man makes him leprous, and if it is 
put in someone's bath, he will soon die. 
The cure: take human semen, and give it to him to drink. Similarly, he 
will be cured if a certain herb called male barberry is given to him. 
Take the membrane around the human heart, and pour into it the blood 
of three other men, and call upon demons; they will answer. 
Take your sweat in a very clean and beautiful basin, and then put it in 
a glass vessel. Put into it scrapings from the soles of your feet, and a little 
of your feces dried in the Sun, and one root of the herb that is called fu in 
Arabic, and in Latin valerian. Give this in a drink to whomever you wish, and 
he will delight in you. 
I, Geber, have tested this, and it is entirely true. Women, however, add 
water with which they have washed their thighs, while keeping their buttocks 
turned toward the east. 
All flesh and bone of men, when burnt, moves and provokes benevolence. 
Three measures of human death—that is, you should measure a corpse 
three times; and with the same measure, you should measure a living man's 
arm from the elbow to the longest finger, and again from the shoulder to the 
same finger, and then from the head to the feet. He will waste away and die. 
Blood taken from the fingers of the left hand when the Moon is 
356 
Quartan fever: a relapsing fever of the kind that recurs every three days. 
357 
This is a recipe for manufacturing imitation gold. 
358 
Collyrium: an ointment put on the eyelids. 
Boob 333 Chapter n 
21} 
in conjunction with the Sun, and from the other when the Moon is in 
conjunction with Venus, and given to someone when the Moon is in 
opposition to the Sun: this provokes delight. This is an experiment of the 
Egyptians, and I have seen it tested many times and discovered its virtue. 
Water of feces and of snails dissolves tartar. Quench sheets of copper in it, 
and they will become white. Put feather alum and dissolved azech in it, and 
it will be better. 
Take the skin of a woman's vulva all the way around, so that it retains its 
opening; and if you look at someone through it, it is the sign of death. This is 
a thing of great sacredness. In the same way, it causes illness. This was taken 
from those among the Greeks who were called Ephesians. 
Skin a human penis, and tan and soften the skin with salt and wheat 
flour, the way belt leather is treated—you should know that you will be able 
to bind and loosen with it. 
Human testicles, dried and powdered, and eaten with frankincense, 
mastic, cinnamon, and cloves, makes men young again and gives them very 
good color. 
A human eye tied up in a snakeskin causes anyone who sees you to 
delight in you and not to hinder you, but to be good to you. 
Whoever suffers from a fever or a headache, if you anoint his head with 
breast milk, the pain will be removed. 
Breast milk with opium brings sleep to the feverish and insomniacs. 
If you wish to go safely on a journey, make one pill from your semen and 
your ear wax, and suspend it from your neck, and you will go safely. Certain 
sages used to carry this with them, saying that a great many properties were 
hidden in it. Some of them thought there were 72 such properties, to all of 
which they used to assign reasons that none were able to contradict. 
The umbilical cord of a newborn wrapped in a red cloth with the tongue 
of a green tree frog—whoever carries this with him will be honored by his 
lord and by others as well. 
Whoever has an illness with pustules, or scabies, should anoint himself 
in hot sunlight with water of blood distilled three times, and then put on 
the earth of blood/3'' and he will be healed, he should do this seven or more 
times. This we have already demonstrated in the book On Properties. 
The right arm of a man and the head of a rabbit kept in anyone's home 
has power against lies. 
Alcohol of human bile with cat eyes helps and makes keen the sight, and 
whoever makes this will cause marvelous things to appear and demons to be 
seen. 
359 
Earth of blood: the dried blood solids left in the retort when all the liquid 
lias been distilled. 
214 
Pfcatrfr-JUber Ittabeiw Cbition 
Take human blood, and grind it with lodestone and the deadly lucula 
that is called Herb of Light. Make a mass of it, and keep it with you in a little 
vessel of gold or silver, and you will have power over enchantments and tricks 
and lies, and above all if you have collected the herb with your own hands 
and the blood is from your own body. 
A certain person from Baldach, however, told me that the herb that 
in Arabic is called fu, in Latin valerian, and in Greek amantilla, has a 
similar virtue. He said also that the virtue of this confection was to cause 
benevolence when eaten or given in a drink. 
Take the vulva of a woman (that is, the skin) and carry it with you 
in a yellow cloth with a serpent's tongue; and you will have the power to 
make discords and friendships. The same may be done with the hair from a 
woman's chest. 
All of the foregoing are found in a certain book published by Geber the 
sage. In the book Methedeyhoz I found the experiments written below. 
To take away sight by suffumigation. Take the blood of dogs, donkeys, 
cats, goats, and cows in equal parts. Mix these bloods together, and put them 
on a gentle fire until they are all blended into one. Then put into it one part 
each of powdered azernec and sublimated mercury. Mix well and put into 
a jar, which you should seal well with luting and bury in manure until it 
putrefies. Then take it out, and beware of its odor. If you put 1/2 ounce of 
this confection in fire, anyone who breathes it will have the sight of their eyes 
closed off by a mist, and they will be unable to see light any more. To cure, 
take fennel juice and green coriander juice. Mix them and put them in the 
eyes, and by this the blindness will be healed. 
For taking away speech. Take two ounces each of cat bile and bear bile, 
four ounces of bat blood, and 1/2 ounces each of lettuce seed, black poppy 
seed, and mandrake root. Liquefy the blood and mix in the other ingredients, 
blend well, and allow the mixture to dry. Then powder it and mix it with 
old wine aged many years, and make lozenges of 1/2 ounce each. If you give 
one of these to anyone in drink or food, he will lose the power of speech 
completely, nor will he be able to communicate in any way. To cure him, let 
the mouth of the patient be filled with oil or butter, and have him hold his 
mouth closed. 
For taking away hearing. Take mandrake, cow bile, and goat bile in 
equal parts. Mix them together and powder them; when they are powdered, 
let them putrefy. Give 1/2 ounce of this in food to whomever you wish, and 
he will completely lose his hearing. To cure, put juice of rue into the ears of 
the patient, and he will be healed. 
For generating discord and enmity. Take the head of a racanus and an 
asp, the hair of a dog and of a black cat, in equal parts. Mix them together, 
Boob 333 C&apter n 
21$ 
and burn them in a jar until they can be powdered. If you throw some of 
this in a place among people, hatred and quarreling will increase among 
them until they kill one another. To cure, take four ounces of mallow 
seeds and two ounces each of the blood and bile of a white dove. Let these 
be powdered, and mixed with the blood over the fire; and make lozenges 
weighing 1/2 ounce each. When you wish to take away this discord, pulverize 
one lozenge, and cast the powder in the place—that is, where the other 
powder was thrown. At once the aforesaid spirit of discord and hatred will be 
taken away from there. 
Confection for sleeping. Take 1/2 ounce each of opium and black 
henbane seeds, and 1/6 ounce each nutmeg, lady's bedstraw, and fresh aloes 
wood. Powder them and mix them with the juice of green coriander; and 
let it putrefy in a jar so that their complexions and spirits may mix with 
one another. Then take it out, and give 1/2 ounce in a drink to anyone you 
wish, and he will sleep for a great space of time during which he cannot be 
awakened. 
For the same. Take four ounces each of scialte nuts, red azernec, 
mandrake seeds or its bark, and black poppy; six ounces of autumn crocus; 
and two ounces of henbane seeds. Mix them all together and allow to putrefy 
for three days; when this is finished, remove them. Give 1/2 ounce to drink 
mixed with wine to whomever you wish. 
For the same. Take equal parts of opium, mandrake bark, lettuce 
seed, branches of scialte nut, arcole juice, black hellebore, and black poppy 
seed. Powder them all, mix them together, and blend with a quantity of old 
wine aged for many years equal in weight to all the foregoing; and leave it 
to putrefy for seven days. Then take it out, and give 1/2 ounce in food to 
whomever you wish. 
For the same. Take henbane juice, mandrake juice, green coriander 
juice, lettuce juice, juice of scialte nuts, and spring crocus in equal parts, and 
opium, a tenth part of all the foregoing. Mix them together. Then take a 
syrup made from mashed figs pressed four times in an oil press, blend an egg 
into it, and take of this syrup an amount equal to all the other ingredients. 
Mix them together, and let it putrefy until all the complexions and spirits are 
united. Never give a dose of this confection larger than 1/4 ounce, and this is 
because of the very great strength that its spirit has in the foregoing. 
A deadly poison. Take equal parts dried scorpions, scialte nuts, black 
poppy, and colocynth. Mix them together and pulverize them, and let them 
putrefy. Be careful of this because 1/2 ounce of it will kill a man. 
For the same. Take soapwort, ariole, and fresh eyebright in equal parts. 
Mix them together, and let it putrefy with a quantity of viper's gall equal 
in weight to all the preceding ingredients—that is, let it putrefy in an jar 
216 
ICfje ^catrir-Jliber Kiibew d^ition 
appropriate for it—and leave it until it has putrefied. Then remove it. Beware 
of this, because its excessive heat and superfluous sharpness damages and 
destroys the blood of the heat and swiftly kills men. 
For the same. Take as many frogs as you can catch, and put them 
on spits arranged as you wish (that is, as many as you wish on each spit) 
thrusting them through from the mouth to the opening of the anus; and 
put the spits upright, so that the frogs are placed with their mouths toward 
the ground. Then have a leaden vessel in which you can collect oil the oil 
that issues from their mouths. You should know that the later oil is much 
more effective in this working than the first; save it for use. Oil of this kind, 
because of its damage to the members of the body, very powerfully kills and 
harms. The first who discovered this deadly poison was Rufus, who tested it, 
and found great wonders in it. 
A wonderful composite stone against poison. The kings of India were 
accustomed to have this stone made as described below, because the wonders 
it wrought in defending them against all danger from poison exceeded all the 
other noble things that were around them. The composition of this stone 
is as follows. Take the eyes of ten deer, and the eyes often vipers or other 
venomous snakes; if you cannot get vipers' eyes, as many as will weigh as 
much as ten of them; and take as much of the head of a toad as equals the 
weight of one of them. Let all these be dried and well cleaned, and powdered 
very finely, until it will pass through a fine cotton sieve. Then let it be put in 
a glazed pot with a very narrow mouth. 
Then take sharp wine flavored with cedar, and turnip juice, eight 
ounces each, and one ounce each of clean white spiderwebs and mastic; the 
spiderwebs should be chopped up as finely as possible, and put with the 
mastic into the two juices. Let them remain there for two days and as many 
nights; then take it up and strain well and combine with the powder in the 
jug already mentioned. When this is done, seal up the mouth of the jar 
tightly, and budy it in burnt straw, leaving it there until all is dissolved and 
reduced to the appearance of oil. Then mix it with water, and put it back in 
the same burnt straw until all the water is consumed, and turned back so that 
it can be coadunated. 
When this is done, take it out and put it in an empty eggshell so that it 
becomes round. Put another eggshell over it and seal it well, and put it back 
again in the same burnt straw, and leave it there until it is partly coagulated. 
Then take it out, piercing a pinhole in it, and wrap it in a silk cloth, and put 
it in bread dough and bake it in a pan. When it is done, take it out and put it 
in the stomach of some kind of fowl, and when it is so placed, roast the fowl. 
Then take it out of the stomach of the aforementioned bird; if you find that it 
is well solidified in the form of a stone, that is good; if otherwise, put it in the 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
217 
stomach of another bird. Roast as before, and proceed in the same way until 
it becomes a stone, and put a thread through the pinhole, and by this thread 
tie it over the loins. 
The kings of India used to make such a stone in this way, and continually 
wore it over their loins. The effect of this stone is that if anything poisonous 
was put before the wearer, in food or drink or anything else, the stone would 
be moved with a great motion and would sweat with a great sweat. This is 
very well known among the Hindus, and it one ofthe great marvels that are 
among them. 
The one who first compounded this stone by his own labor was King 
Behentater, who was one of the kings of India, and a great sage. It was he 
who built the city of Manif, in which he built mighty buildings, and in those 
buildings constructed images that spoke. He it was who discovered how 
to use numbers to make computations for love, which is one of the great 
wonders the Hindus have. When two people were given these numbers 
in food or drink or in any other manner, they became great friends and 
well pleasing to each other. If the aforesaid numbers were carved in wood, 
and bread or anything else edible was sealed with them and you gave it to 
someone to eat, he will delight in you with a great love. If those numbers are 
written on your clothing, your garments cannot be taken away from you;"'" 
and if you write them on banners that are put in the street to draw business, 
they will draw business to you. 
The lesser of these numbers is 220, and the greater is 284.361 The way to 
use these numbers is as follows. Write the smaller and the larger number in 
the figures of al-Khwarismi. Give the lesser in food to whomever you wish; 
you should eat the larger. The one who receives the smaller will be obedient 
to you as the lesser is obedient to the greater, and you will be delighted 
by him because of the marvelous property and power of the aforesaid 
computations. These computations may be done similarly with raisins, and 
pomegranate seeds, and eating whatever other fruit you wish. This is done 
by the number, and not by the figure.362 I have experienced the aforesaid 
computations many times, and have found truth in them as narrated above. 
This king made twelve festivals for the people of Egypt3''3 in the 
360 
Garments of quality were a common target for thieves in medieval times. 
361 
These same "amicable numbers" were used in a magical image in Book 
j, chapter 5, and the following instruction to write them in "the figures of al-
Knwarismi" (Arabic rather than Roman numerals) appeared there as well. 
362 
That is, you give 220 raisins, pomegranate seeds, or what have you to your 
target, and eat 284 ofth em yourself. 
363 
This leap from India and Egypt is not as strange as it seems in the light of 
medieval geography. Most medieval geographers, Arab as well as European, believed 
that the Nile and the Ganges were the same river—both, after all, were infested by 
crocodiles—and that the Indian Ocean was a landlocked sea with the Nile curving 
around it through the unknown lands ofthe south. 
218 
jC&e Picatrij^JLiber ttubeu* Cftntion 
twelve months, that is, one in each month. Then he made a house wholly 
surrounded by images, and these images used to cure the people of Egypt of 
all infirmities. In the head of each of them the infirmity assigned to it was 
portrayed. The people of that place very often used to cure themselves of 
their infirmities by those images in the following way. They would approach 
the images, and describe their infirmities to the image assigned to the same 
infirmity, from which they wanted to be healed; and at once they were healed. 
The same king also made an image in the form of a man laughing, and this 
was the virtue and power of that image; anyone who was oppressed by sorrow 
and melancholy would look at that image, and at once he would be cheerful 
and laughing, and the thoughts that troubled him would be handed over to 
oblivion. All in all, the effects of his images proceeded so that that the people 
of that city used to worship the king as though he was a god. 
The same king also made bronze images in that city with two wings 
extended, and these were entirely covered with gold. Then he set them 
in place in the city. Their virtue was that all who passed by them, man or 
woman, who had committed adultery, uncovered their natures, nor were 
they able to pass by those images without uncovering themselves. All who 
uncovered themselves, fornicators and fornicatresses alike, were led into the 
presence ofthe king, and were truly known to be guilty of that crime, and 
punished justly according to the laws of that city. For this reason both the 
men and the women of that city used to shun that form of wickedness. 
The same king also made an earthenware vessel that he filled with water, 
and his entire army used to drink from it without decreasing the water in 
it. This king lived in the time of Alexander the Great, and it is said that 
he presented this vessel with some other marvels to him. The vessel was 
constructed by the artificial magisteries of science, the properties of nature, 
and the knowledge ofthe strengths ofthe spirits of the planets and the fixed 
stars. 
In this same way was made the pillar that Acaym king of India made 
in the gate ofthe city of Nube, which was made of black marble and was 
completely full of water. No matter how much was taken out of it, the 
water never decreased; and this was because it attracted the moisture ofthe 
air by virtue ofthe magistery by which it was made. The king constructed 
this work for the benefit ofthe people, on account ofthe distance of that 
city from the banks of the Nile and its closeness to the salt sea, and because 
of this latter it happened that by the sun's rays, from the water of the sea, 
drew up gross and humid vapors, from which the most subtle were purified 
of their salt in the air, and by the most suble magisteries of geometry and the 
science of magic, used to desdend into that pillar as though they condensed 
out of the air. It was for this reason that water was never lacking in the pillar, 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
219 
because ofthe aforementioned attraction, which happened in the same way 
that the bloodstone attracts whatever is put around it. 
Beyond these, the Hindus have other great marvels, some of which I 
propose to relate presently. For prohibiting every motion ofthe body. Take 
a human penis, and chop it into pieces, and stir it into powdered opium, 
scialte nuts, and a little azernec. Then put it into a lead vessel to putrefy, and 
beware of it. When you extract it from putrefaction, you will find it liquefied 
and as though reduced to oil. If you give a little of this oil in food or drink 
to anyone you wish, all his senses, motion, and spirit will be closed and 
stupefied, nor will he be able to move any part of his body. The Hindus used 
to perform many wonders with this oil, mixing it with other things, giving 
it in food, and revealing that which they desired and that which was outside 
their customs. They would give it in food to whomever they wished, and 
by this they would demonstrate what they wanted never to be revealed, and 
would even transform men into whatever figure or form they wished. 
That you may appear in the form of any animal you wish. Take the 
semen of a man who is complete in all his members, and put it in an egg 
(that is, in the shell) mixed together with the semen of any animal you wish. 
Seal the egg well and leave it to putrefy in hot manure for three days. When 
this is complete, take it out of the manure, and in the egg you will find the 
similitude of an animal. Take it out and put it in sesame oil, and leave it for 
three more days. That animal will drink that oil during those three days, and 
while it is still living, let it be ground in that same oil. If you light a lamp with 
the oil, anyone who anoints his face with it will appear in the form ofthe 
animal whose semen you used. This was considered among the Hindus to be 
a noble secret, that they would never reveal among anyone but themselves. 
That a man should be unable to leave a city. Take a man's semen and 
a little of his blood, and cook it with twice the amount of honey until all 
the semen has dissolved into the honey. Then cook the honey until it is well 
browned. Give this food to whomever you wish—that is, to someone who 
intends to set out on a long journey. Whoever eats of it will not be able 
to leave the city that day; rather, he will remain there as though rapt and 
insensible. 
A great wonder of magic. The Hindus also make another composition, 
with which they used to perform great works of magic. This is its 
composition. They took a sow, and closed her up in an empty house. One 
room ofthe house they prepared with iron and tin so that she could not leave 
the house. In the same house, next to the sow, they would put a boar in a 
room prepared the same way, and once this was done, they remained in that 
place for 24 days. They would begin this work when the Sun entered the first 
degree of Capricorn. Each day they would give them crumbled wheat bread 
220 
d i e WattivfLfbue ftubeu* Coition 
soaked in milk to eat, as much as they wanted. At the end of those 24 days 
the sow, having the greatest desire to couple with the boar, would be moved 
by so great a motion that from her flowed a great quantity of female seed,3M 
similar to coagulated cow's blood. 
The Hindus would make great artifices by collecting this seed; they would 
put it in a lead vessel, seal its mouth well, and put it in manure for 24 days 
to putrefy. At the end of those days they would remove it from the manure, 
and when the aforementioned vessel had cooled, they would open it and find 
in it an animal that moved. They would feed it for three days with nuts and 
milk, as we have said above concerning the sow. At the end of the three days 
they would drown it in oil, with which they would perform great marvels of 
magic, giving it in food and lighting lamps with it and anointing faces and 
bodies with it, and many other marvels that are not worth relating because of 
their prolixity. We ask, however, that those who perform the foregoing keep 
it as the greatest of secrets, and do not reveal it to anyone except to someone 
else who is expert in it. 
Chapter Twelve 
Rules Necessary in this Science 
hose who intend to involve themselves in this science ought to 
know that it is by the works and experiments they do in this world 
that profound and secret sciences are known, and by works and 
experiments doubts are solved.365 This is because when anyone accomplishes 
his desires, his doubts are settled. You should indeed be greedy in all the 
things, and about all the things, that we have taught you so far, and you 
should be faithful in the operations themselves, and continually observe 
the ways of the sages and the habits of the ancients in the operations of this 
science. From unlawful foods and pleasures you should stay as far as you 
possibly can; indeed, you ought to think ofthe salvation of your soul and the 
love of God as assiduously as you can, because desire and love attract spirits 
and incline you to follow spiritual effects, and complete and reveal all their 
properties furthering the thing that is desired. 
If that orientation be toward God, Who is the beginning and end of all 
364 
Medieval embryology held that females had an equivalent of semen, which 
mingled with the male's semen to produce offspring. 
365 
This sentence all by itself does much to resove the ongoing debate about 
the descent of modern science from Renaissance magical traditions, which were 
powerfully influenced by Picatrix. 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
221 
things and the perpetual and eternal Lord of Lords, then that love will be 
durable and perfect. If that love instead is fixed on corporeal things, that love 
will be unstable and a corruptible and terminating love. The will is divided 
into different kinds, for there is a love which is accompanied by health and 
honor is that love which is fixed on God the sublime and exalted, and to this 
kind belongs the love of fathers, teachers, and holy men; likewise the love 
of piety and the love of children. There is a love which is advantageous and 
helpful, and this is the love of people who delight in helping one another 
freely. The will, when it is most acute, is called love, and as we have said 
above, when we put another ahead of God, that ought rightly to be called 
corruptible love. 
We base our entreaties on God Himself, that He may so illuminate 
your mind and spirit that His profound sciences may be opened to you, and 
that He may protect and defend you from the conspiracies ofthe common 
people and of evildoers, and that you will not reveal any of your secrets to the 
ignorant, because it is thus that they become the murderers of holy men and 
prophets. 
Now the properties that are proposed and the examples that are given 
in the books ofthe prophets concerning this science, if you were to try to 
deduce them by experiment, would seem to be of a fraudulent nature, nor 
would you be able to deduce the effects promised by them in eternity. If you 
understand them, however, in the manner we have said (that is, with the right 
attitude and steady faith and an understanding of the causes of effects), then 
they will be seen to be noble, high, and precious, and of a nature remote from 
the merely animal in man. If we ought properly to obey our parents, who 
gave life and being to us, we ought even more to obey the prophets and saints 
who gave us examples, that by their rule of life our souls might be saved and 
we be led to perpetual life. When virtue is found in our bodies, on account of 
the perfection ofthe elemental bodies, then that virtue cares for and governs 
our bodies in their figures and effects, and it is not separated from them until 
its proper time. 
This is what the prophets call nature. They call it natural because virtue 
of this kind is the cause ofthe government of bodies for a determinate time, 
in whatever accords to the natural division of each one. For this reason it is 
called nature by them, because nature is the primary innate principle of all 
animals and plants. 
Here is an example. A stone that is thrown falls back down by its nature, 
and this is not by the size of its body, because other bodies are not similar to it 
in size, but rather this effect happens in an opposite way, as in the case of fire, 
which ascends more quickly the larger its body is; this is understood to be the 
principle of this manner of motion, and this is called nature. Furthermore, 
222 
C&e Picatrtr-iLtber Kubeu* Gftution 
they call this motion "nature," and again, they say that the nature of an 
element is its form and natural shape. 
For this reason physicians use this noun, "nature," for the complexion 
and the innate heat and for the forms and figures ofthe body and for motion 
and spirit, and it is used according to whatever their intention is. Now in 
truth this noun, "nature," is an equivocal name, because it is used for every 
body and all its properties, and for the humors, the elements of heaven, and 
the virtues that God has placed there that are the causes of generation and 
corruption, movement and rest, in all things that are moved and made to rest. 
For this reason above all, the sages have defined it as the end and beginning of 
motion and rest. 
The philosophers have said that corporeal form cannot exist in bodies 
except by the mediation of heaven between them and spirit. Plato defines 
it thus: nature is a body perfect for making beings. Galienus says: nature is 
the natural heat helping the body and removing corruptions and detriments 
from it, insofar as it is able; and when the virtue ofthe body concurs with it 
and makes it apt for government, conduct, and so on. Abenteclis says: for 
it is a simple body having one form and one figure, and in it is power and 
life, but it itself is the form of life, as appears in children, to whose nature a 
certain magistery preserving life is given by nursing, sleeping, etc.; and when 
it is taught to artificial things, the work of the magister is accomplished. 
I have recounted the foregoing only to clarify the light of your intellect, 
because I have striven in all things to be instructed and learned in the creation 
and contemplation of every manner of being that may be found in the 
universe. By doing the same, you will have an adept mind, by the intellectual 
conjunction ofthe possible with the agent. Thus it is completed. 
C&t* ftmi&e* t&e t&irb boob of Picatrix tlje fourth boob foUotow. 
Book Four 
224 
C&e Picatrix Jitter Kubeu* L i t t o n 
Book Four 
ere begins the fourth book, in which is revealed the properties of 
spirits, and those things that are necessary in this art, and how they 
may be helped by images, suffumigations, and other things. 
Chapter One: By what virtue and force spirit proceeds, and 
what are the properties of spirits, bodies, senses, intellect, 
and soul, as well as the differences between them 
Chapter Two: What vigor the spirit of the Moon brings to 
this inferior world, and what ought to be done with each of 
the seven planets 
Chapter Three: What the Chaldeans held to be the 
profundities and secrets of this science, and what they said 
about it 
Chapter Four: The images and reasonings that greatly 
further this science 
Chapter Five: The ten sciences that are necessary to this 
art, and how this science is helped by them, and what is the 
foundation of the science of magic 
Chapter Six: H o w the suffumigations of the stars ought to 
be made, and certain compositions necessary to this science 
Chapter Seven: The things of the magical art found in the 
book The Chaldean Agriculture which Abudaer Abemiaxie 
translated from the Chaldean language into Arabic 
Chapter Eight: The virtues of other things which Nature 
does by her own properties 
Chapter Nine: Images whose virtues perform marvels, that 
were found in a book that was discovered in the church of 
Coredib and the book of Queen Folopedre; and a description 
of all the rules necessary in working with magical images 
flBoofe 4 Chapter i 
Chapter One 
By what virtue and force spirit proceeds, and what are 
the properties of spirits, bodies, sense, intellect, and soul, 
as well as the differences between them 
he ancient sages agree in this, that God disposed five things 
and ordered them by degrees, putting the noblest in the highest 
degree—that is, prime matter and prime form/66 which is the 
primal source of all; second, perception or intellect; third, spirit; '6" fourth, 
the nature of heavenly things; and fifth, the elements, and things made of 
the elements. First, however, he placed in his highest heaven a circle where 
no other god and no other lord but Himself could remain, and He ordained 
that all other light should emanate from there; and thence, by His power, he 
distributed and spread knowledge, and the nobility ofthe other virtues that 
pertain to that virtue. 
Perception and intellect He put in the first circle below that one, from 
which they descend similarly to the way light descends from that one; and 
thence, by His power, knowledge and the nobility of virtues that pertain to it 
are emanated. Next below He placed the circle of spirit, from which spirit is 
emanated similar to the way light emanates from the first; knowledge and the 
nobility appropriate to it (that is, that which proceeds from the circle of spirit, 
as well as from the circles above it) flow forth by means of it. Then in order 
below spirit he placed nature,16" which proceeds similarly to the first; and by 
His power the nobility appropriate to it was generated in it by those things 
that are above it. 
It is therefore clear that the first form is more noble and in every way 
more subtle than perception, as perception is more noble and subtle than 
spirit, and spirit than nature, and nature than the elements. Each ofthe 
aforesaid He put one above another according to their proper measure of 
distance, as though to say that the first is absolute, pure in itself, and free from 
all grossness; while the second has in it a little more grossness or materiality 
than the first, and less than the third, and so by degrees descending to the 
elements and elementary things. This is because that prime essence shines 
366 
Prime form: the first Platonic form or idea, the Form of the Good, True and 
Beautiful, which in medieval Platonism was identified with God. 
367 
Spirit: in medieval cosmology, vital force, which is intermediate between 
f i n d and matter. 
368 
Note that "nature" here is a term for the quintessence, the subtle substance 
°f which all things above the circle ofthe Moon is made, according to medieval 
Physics. 
226 
C&e ^catrir-Jliber Kubeu* edition 
more brightly in itself, while other things lacking its purity, down to the 
necessary endpoint, return to it as they create species, that is, as subordinate 
genera, they return to the most general genera, as each receives nobility from 
its superiors and distributes its power to its inferiors. 
Presently He created and formed the heavens, and placed the heaven of 
spirit in the midst of four other heavens, of which the two above it, those 
ofthe prime essence and intellect, are luminous and clear, and the two 
below, those of nature and the elements, are shadowy and obscure. But the 
heaven of spirit, as a subordinate genus, receives the knowledge and nobility 
appropriate to it from the superiors and distributes them to the inferiors. 
In the end, spirit is conquered and illuminated by the two heavens above 
it, and receives from them light, knowledge, and nobility. Spirit itself is most 
fully formed when it reaches toward the heights, and resides in the place 
where it was made and created, and whence it receives fortune, goodness, 
and light; this place is called paradise. But spirit conquering the two heavens 
below it is shadowy, miserable, and unfortunate spirit, and descends to the 
lowest things, and resides in a place where it is held captive and can find no 
rest; this place is called Hell. 
Again, this same spirit created animals and vegetables and all solid 
bodies. These do not receive perception and knowledge from the prime form; 
the latter distributed very little to them, since they were not appropriate to 
it. They, however, are conquered by the two lower heavens (that is, those 
of nature and the elements), and reside on earth, where they,exist, remain, 
and are created. All the aforementioned proceed from the divine power and 
virtue. 
Here is an example. Trees are born in the earth—their beginning is their 
roots, and their ends are the branches, leaves, and fruit born from them. Their 
roots draw in the vegetable virtue from the moisture ofthe earth, while the 
twigs draw it from the air. Those trees in whose nature the earthly material 
dominates the aerial have roots longer than their branches, and conversely, 
when air predominates over earth, the branches grow longer than the roots. 
Therefore, to confirm the aforesaid> we see with our senses trees and other 
vegetables born in the earth that have roots longer than their branches, and 
vice versa; and there are trees whose roots dry out but not their twigs, and vice 
versa. 
We see the same thing in birds, among whom those whose nature is 
more appropriate to the earth fly more heavily, while the more their nature 
is assimilated to air, the more lightly and swiftly they fly. The same is true 
of human beings who, the more their nature is compounded of the subtle 
elements and the more it is purified of grossness and feeds on lighter foods, 
the more subtle and spiritual, and the more able to understand spiritual 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
2 27 
things, they become; while to the contrary, the more that human beings are 
composed of earth and the grosser elements, and feed on coarser food, the less 
able they become to ascend to spiritual things, and the more accustomed they 
naturally become to gross and corporeal perceptions. By this it is clear that 
evil proceeds from corporeal things, while good proceeds from spirit. 
Matter, however, is divided into two parts, that is, spiritual and corporeal. 
The spiritual portion is the first matter, which is the supernal world, and the 
first form, which is the spiritual first element (that is, sense, soul, nature, 
the elements, and the beginnings of every kind that are first purified of 
matter), and the first unity, which remains indivisible as it is a unity, a point, 
and the like, and that which cannot be divided by time, as the instant of 
the beginning of a line, which is a point. Corporeal matter is that which is 
composed ofthe elements, such as animals, trees, and the like. 
Furthermore, matter is either simple or composite. Simple matter is 
everything above the heavens, and composite is everything that exists below 
the heavens, and thus can be perceived by sight and experienced. Bandaclis 
the sage said that all matter that can be perceived by the five corporeal senses 
is corporeal matter and entirely composite, and when it is of this kind, it is 
corrupted and changed, becoming a localized thing lacking a location.369 All 
matter that cannot be perceived by the five corporeal senses is called simple 
matter, pure, spiritual, luminous, stable, and exalted. 
All matter that can be perceived by one ofthe five senses17" is intermediate 
between simple and spiritual matter, on the one hand, and composite and 
corporeal matter on the other. Thus what is corporeal is held by corporeal 
bodies, and with these they pass through changes of time and color, while 
what is spiritual remains with light and exalted spirit, and with these endures 
for infinite ages. You, however, who propose to study this book should 
consider how you may lead your soul to the degree and understanding of the 
blessed spirits, which you may do if in all your doings you strive to follow the 
spiritual part, the cognition of which differs from that of beasts. 
The sages disagree, however, about the properties of sense and its 
divisions.371 For this name—sense or intellect312—is used by them to denote 
369 
A fine point of medieval physics. When a composite object is corrupted— 
that is, goes out of existence because its component parts separate—it still exists in 
potential; there is simply no place where it happens to exist. 
370 
That is, by one rather than by all five. 
371 
The rest of this chapter is devoted to a careful examination ofthe concept 
of sense, sensus in Latin, which has no good equivalent in modern English. According 
to the competing definitions given in the following paragraphs, it represents (1) 
consciousness; (2) the inborn capacity to understand the basic rules of logic; (3) the 
sum of accurate human knowledge; and (4) the perception of eternal ideas as reflected 
in the material world. 
372 
Note that the word "intellect" here has its old meaning, the direct 
perception of noncorporeal truths, and does not mean the discursive reasoning mind. 
228 
j&C&e Ptcatrir-JLtber Unbent Coition 
four different things. In the first sense, it is used to describe reason, because 
humanity, distinct from all other animals, who lack sense and discretion, 
is disposed to receive knowledge and the secret labors ofthe masters; and 
the property of sense is that it is disposed to the acquisition of knowledge. 
Sense appears from this as a divine light infused by God into the heart, 
which disposes it to see and understand things exactly as they are. This is the 
opinion of one party of the sages who discussed this subject. Thus Seusdalis 
said that the word "human" is equivocal, that is, it refers both to people in 
whom intellect is active and to people in whom intellect is lacking. 
The second opinion. Sense is that which is recognized by knowledge and 
apparent to the senses, as in children who are able to perceive very little of 
the secrets of nature, but who apprehend natureas though this was naturally 
granted to them: for example, in numbers, they recognize what two plus 
one is, and that two bodies cannot simultaneously occupy the same space, 
and that it is impossible for one body to be in two places at the same time. 
One party among the sages, speaking of this, assert that those who deny this 
opinion demonstrate its truth. 
The third opinion. Sense, according to another opinion ofthe ancient 
sages, consists of that which has been proven by long experience. Those who 
lack cognition or sense thus ought rightly to be called imbeciles, fools, blind, 
and stupid. 
The fourth opinion. Sense, according to others, consists of natural 
cognitions whereby are understood the profundities of eternal things, from 
which the corruptible things of this world descend. When these natural 
cognitions are found in some person, we say that he has the sense to overcome 
and conquer his bestial nature, and is assimilated to the spiritual and eternal. 
This is the property by which human beings are distinguished from other 
animals. 
Thus the two prior are natural and the two latter are acquired by study 
and learning. Thus a sage said: "I see that sense is of two kinds, that is, 
natural and acquired." The acquired cannot be had in any way other than by 
means ofthe natural, just as the light of the sun is little help to an eye that is 
naturally defective. 
Here we proceed to another, higher distinction of sense.373 The ancient 
sages divided sense into six parts, of which two are comprehended by 
words—that is, the general sense and the universal sense, so that we speak of 
the natural and universal spirit; which they understand in this way, that all 
373 
The distinction made here is, first, between consciousness (sense) in its 
general meaning, apart from the universe, and consciousness in interaction with the 
universe; and second, both of these as they relate to individual beings with bodies 
(such as humans), individual beings who are free from embodiment (such as God), 
and individual beings who exist in an intermediate state, such as spirits and angels. 
)15oob 4 C h a p t e r i 
229 
things are divided into three parts—that is, the body, the natural sense, and 
the spirits of intelligences and the angels who move the heavens. Of these the 
first and lowest obtains its place from the two latter, the second we consider 
the most noble of all, and the third we know to be the medium between 
them. 
The reason why we say the second is nobler is that it is purified of all 
material dependence; while separated intelligences and the angels who move 
the spheres are intermediate between these, since they move the heavens, by 
the motion of which the active senses work their effects. The general sense, 
however, is that which we have described above in the division of sense, that 
which is removed from form or matter, because when we speak of man in 
general, this is understood to mean the reason of rational men or the reason 
of which all men are capable, by which they are distinguished from all other 
animals. This they call the general sense. 
Universal sense, however, is expressed in two ways, of which one is 
more appropriate to the word, for by it is understood the genus ofthe whole 
universe.3"4 The second kind of reason is that which, according to the way 
the explanation of these names is understood, is a kind of property apart 
from material things and all their parts, which is moved naturally and not 
according to accident. Of this genus the lowest grade is active sense, which 
is assigned to human spirits and the higher sciences." This genus is the 
principle of all things that follow the first principle; and the first principle 
governs everything. 
The second of all, according to this intention, is the ninth sphere, which 
goes around once each day and night carrying the other spheres which are 
caught up in it. By reason of its magnitude and capacity, which contain all 
other bodies, it is called the body of the universe.3"6 Thereafter, according 
to this opinion, the universal sense is a substance equally distributed in 
all its parts, apart from matter. It moves itself, desiring to assimilate itself 
to movement. Its movement has been discovered to be the beginning of 
everything. Thus the founder ofthe Law said that the first thing created by 
God was sense, which by divine aspiration began to move. 
The general spirit, however, is called many different things, and these all 
have names corresponding to their subjects, and all of them are assigned as 
spirits to their proper bodies. The spirit ofthe universe is the sense ofthe 
374 
That is, the genus (category) of consciousness that exists in the universe as a 
whole, the Anima Mundi or soutof the universe. 
375 
"This genus" is the category of individual conscious beings, of which 
human beings who are capable ofthe higher sciences are the lowest manifestation. 
The implication, already referenced in the words of Seusdalis above, is that ignorant 
human beings are not actually conscious. 
376 
The Anima Mundi is thus the consciousness of the ninth sphere or Primum 
Mobile. 
2JO 
i<>icatrir Jitter Kubeiw Cftritlon 
universe. Thus every substance that is wholly incorporated in the moving 
heavenly bodies overflows, and this is according to the stillness of sense. The 
relationship between the spirit of all and the sense of all, however, is equal 
to that between our spirit and our active sense. The spirit or intellect ofthe 
universe is the principle by which natural bodies are perceived, and the grades 
thereof in receiving perception accord with the grades of sense in all things, 
and the perception ofthe one is assimilated to that ofthe other.'7" The 
foregoing are the rules that have been found concerning sense. 
Aristotle said that the sense ofthe sensing spirit is received from that 
which is sensed. If anyone asks in what way the spirit understands, the 
answer is that the rational spirit discerns by the light of the senses, when it 
desires to know anything, and when it receives this same light, it rejoices 
therein and achieves its intention. Its light extends over all perceptible 
things until it is closed in sleep, wherein all sensing spirits are stupefied and 
relaxed, and to which all intellectual spirits are subject. If someone objects 
to this, saying, 'Who knows whether the spirit understands something while 
it is sleeping?' I answer that something remains from the spirit, even as heat 
remains from fire after the fire has been extinguished. According to the unity 
ofthe sense with the body, it can be terminated, despite the view of one party 
ofthe sages. 
Empedocles said that sense is not able to be terminated because it is 
a simple substance, and simple substance has neither genus nor difference 
because it is not separated. A definition cannot be completed except by 
genus and divisions.'"8 He says further that sense is divided into two—that 
is, a general sense that contains all things virtually and is not fatigued thereby 
(and is itself all things in itself in its own substance, and is coextensive with 
time, which does not precede it by a single instant); the other is a noble and 
selected sense, which is purified and consoled, which is only found in the 
human body; and then only when it has been purified to its proper purity and 
consoled for its sorrow. It is the light cast by the light of the general sense. 
The soul is a spirit of divine intelligence, which divine intelligence 
created and placed in the body without any medium; and He planted it in 
those bodies which follow the light of the Sun, because it is by the Sun that, 
by means of rays, He touches the bodies themselves. Souls are ordered in 
natural forms according to their effects; and from Him come the capacities of 
377 
That is, the more accurate the perception of natural bodies by the 
individual, the more that perception corresponds to the perception of natural bodies 
by the spirit ofthe universe. 
378 
This is a basic rule of medieval logic: the definition of something must 
include the genus or class to which it belongs, and the differences or divisions that set 
it apart from other things of the same genus. A human being, for example, can be 
defined as a featherless biped; that is, it belongs to the genus of animals with only two 
feet, and its difference or division from other bipeds is that it lacks feathers. 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 233 
sensation, estimations or cogitations, imaginations, stillnesses, memories, and 
the like. 
One party among the ancient sages determined this: Nature is a durable 
motion by which corporeal agents are perfected or completed, and live their 
potential. 
Chapter Two 
What vigor the spirit of the Moon brings to this inferior world, and 
what ought to be done with each of the seven planets 
ou should know, however, that one party among the Chaldean 
and Egyptian sages said that the Moon pours out and transmits 
the influences of the planets to this composite world. Because of 
this, they did workings, sacrifices, and prayers to the Moon herself upon her 
ingress into each sign. Here I have opened to you the same workings of other 
nations, and what is said here is translated out of the Arabic language. 
How one can speak with the spirits of the Moon, and first, when she 
is in Aries. When you wish to attract the virtue and power ofthe Moon 
when she is in Aries, at the hour when she is completely risen, because that 
is better and more useful for your petition; in that very hour, put on a crown 
and go to a green and watery place near the banks of a river or running water. 
Take with you a rooster with a divided crest, which you will behead with 
the bone of another rooster, as you must not in any way touch that rooster 
with iron. Turn your face to the Moon, for this is a very great secret among 
them. ,7J Put in front of yourself two iron thuribles full of burning coals, in 
which you should cast successively grains of incense, so that the smoke rises 
up toward the Moon. Then stand upright between the censers, and say: 
You, O Moon, luminous, honored, lovely, who with your light shatters the 
shadows, you ascend in your rising and fill every horizon with your light and 
beauty. I come to you humbly, seeking wealth, for which I humbly ask you." 
Here state your petition. Then take ten steps forward, always looking at the 
Moon, and repeating the aforesaid words. Carry one ofthe thuribles with 
you, into which you should cast four ounces of storax. 
Then burn your sacrifice, and draw the following figures on a leaf of 
cannabis with the ashes of the sacrifice and a small amount of crocus: 
379 
That is, among the Chaldeans and Egyptians. 
2J2 
& & ^catrtr-Jlfljer Kubeu* cftrttfon 
Then burn the leaf. At once, as the smoke rises, you will see before you 
the figure of a handsome man dressed in the finest clothes, standing between 
the thuribles, to whom you should address your petition, and it will be 
fulfilled by him. At any time after this, when you wish to ask something of 
him, repeat the working just given, and the aforesaid form will appear to you 
and answer your questions. 
When the Moon is in Taurus. When the Moon is in Taurus, and you 
wish to attract her virtue and power, you should know first of all that the 
Moon has diverse effects and diverse powers in each one ofthe signs. When 
you wish to do this work, go to the same kind of place as was said ofthe 
other sign,18" and bring with you one rooster and one thurible with fire. Dress 
yourself in linen garments dyed with alayeron or pomegranate rinds, and wear 
a hood upon your head. You should have one gourd full of water in which 
nut wood has been boiled. Take some ofthe water in your right hand, pour 
it into your left, and wash your hands, arms, and face with it. Be careful that 
the hood does not fall back from your head. Then wash your feet with the 
aforesaid water. Then take a new rush mat or reed mat, on which no human 
foot has ever stepped, and let this mat be wrapped entirely in a linen cloth 
painted green and red. From the place where you are standing, or from the 
cloth that covers the mat, jump and land with both feet on the aforesaid mat, 
and say: "Ribharim ribharim caypharim caypharim dyaforim dyaforim." 181 
Repeat these names twenty times. Then stand upright, and go back to the 
gourd of water already mentioned, and again wash your hands. Then behead 
your sacrifice, and saying the same words again, burn it. Continually, while 
you perform this working, suffumigate with incense and mastic. Then you 
will see the figure of a man, to whom you may ask your petition, and what 
you desire shall be accomplished. 
Something that appears in this working reminds me of a certain person 
who had a friend who lost everything he had and fell into great poverty. He 
said that the lord of his friend's ascendant was Saturn, and Saturn was an 
infortune to him and the source of his poverty. He showed his friend how to 
pray to the Moon when she was in Taurus. The friend did the whole working, 
and there appeared to him the form of a man, to whom he asked his petition 
and described his poverty. It seemed to him that the man took him by the 
hand and led him to a certain ditch, and told him to dig there. He did so, 
380 
That is, of Aries. 
381 
In the Arabic text, these words are "Rabqar rabqar iqam iqam taqfur 
taqfur." 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
235 
and found a treasure there which made him a rich man. 
When the Moon is in Gemini. When the Moon is in Gemini and 
you wish to attract her virtue and power, go to a high place where the winds 
blow. Take with you a rooster, and the aforesaid suffumigation, and a ruler of 
yellow brass three cubits'"2 long and a thurible of the same brass, in which you 
light a fire and fan it with the ruler; and in the midst ofthe fire put a pound 
ofstorax. Hold one end ofthe ruler over the fire (that is, while the smoke 
rises) and point the other end toward the Moon. Then put on the fire three 
ounces of incense and a little amber, and hold the ruler in the smoke as we 
have already said. Then sit before the fire in the thurible and take the ruler 
in your hands, and make a circle with it, in such a way that you are at the 
center ofthe circle. Then take seven heaps of dried beanstalk, and put them 
in seven places around the circumference of the circle. Divide your sacrifice 
into seven parts, and put each part onto one ofthe heaps of beanstalk. When 
this is done, kindle the fire with the ruler in the aforesaid beanstalks until 
the sacrifice is burnt. Thereafter, stand in the middle of the circle and say, 
"You, O Moon, refulgent and luminous, honored in your realm and gathered 
into the place and degree of your exaltation, because you govern this world 
by your power and spirit— I call to you and I ask of your spiritual power 
that you will do this for me." Then state your petition; supplicating and 
praying, prostrate yourself to the ground and say "abrutim abrutim gebrutim 
gebrutim"-w twenty times. Then raise your head above the ground, and you 
will see a form as described above, to whom you should speak your petition, 
and it will be accomplished effectually. 
When the Moon is in Cancer. When the Moon is in Cancer, and you 
wish to attract her virtue and power, climb up to a high place, where there 
is a spot elevated above an ample plain. Then look to the right and to the 
left, before you and behind you, listening, and holding a turtle-dove in your 
hand. Behead it, and take four feathers from its right wing and the same 
number from its left; cut off its beak, and burn it completely. Then take the 
aforementioned feathers, mix them with two ounces of colocynth and four 
ounces ofstorax, and put all this in a single pan. Then take two ounces of 
white behem, which must be added to the ashes of the sacrifice and mixed 
with the juice of birthwort, and out of this make the figure of a man riding 
on a lion. 
When this is done, rise up and raise the image before you, and light a 
fire, into which you should put your suffumigation, and say: "You, O Moon, 
who are full of light, replete with benevolence and beauty, and equal in your 
382 
A cubit is a unit of" measurement equal to the length of the forearm and 
hand from the elbow to the tip of the longest finger. 
383 
In the Arabic text these words are "Hirut, hirut, garut, garut," 
m 
l^icatriF-Jlfljer itiibeiw CBDttion 
altitude, I pour out my prayers to you and send my petition." When this 
is done, make a circle in the earth, and in the center thereof put the image 
you have made, after writing on it the name of that which you wish to turn 
aside. Then go back and repeat the same words, and prostrate yourself to 
the ground. After this, rise up, and take six ounces of vinegar, and dissolve 
the image completely therein. Add one grain of nutmeg, a quarter ounce 
of amber, four ounces of gall-nut, and one and a half pounds ofstorax, and 
put it over a fire until it is well boiled. Out of it make pills weighing one 
ounce each, and suffumigate with these to the Moon for seven nights (that is, 
burning one pill each night), and save the rest. The sages who have labored 
at this work have said that, if you suffumigate anyone you wish with this 
suffumigation, and they breathe the odor, they will never be able to disobey 
your commands. 
Many who have practiced this science, when beginning 
a journey on which they faced lions, bears, serpents, scorpions, and other 
noxious animals, were freed from experiencing any harm from them through 
working with the aforesaid suffumigation. 
When the Moon is in Leo. When the Moon is in Leo and you wish 
to attract her virtue and power, go to an uninhabited place, and carry seven 
thuribles with you, which you should place in a circle on the ground in such 
a way that one cubit separates each thurible from the next. Between each 
thurible and the next put a goose's egg on which is written these figures: 
Then take a needle of yellow brass three palms-1*4 in length, which you 
should hold in your right hand; upon your head you should at all times 
have a yellow hat, made of wool in the Arab fashion, and you should wear 
a shirt of wool, dyed yellow. In the center of the circle, behead a rooster 
with a divided crest, as we have described in the sign of Aries. Then burn the 
meat of the chicken in the thuribles. Take some of its blood on the point 
of the needle, and let it drip from the needle into the thuribles and onto the 
aforementioned eggs. When this is done, count two thuribles from the one in 
front of you, and take the egg after that thurible, and put it before you, and 
strike it repeatedly with the needle, suffumigating with incense and yellow 
sandalwood, saying "Hendeb hendeb"1"1 fifty times. Then there will come to 
384 
that is, three times the width of your own palm; for most people, this will be 
8 to 10 inches. 
385 
These words are "Andab, Andah" in the Arabic text, and are to be said 50 
times rather than 15. 
Boob 333 C&apter 10 
20} 
you the tangible form of a superior man, to whom you should address your 
petition; and it will be effectually accomplished at once. 
When the Moon is in Virgo. When the Moon is in Virgo and you wish 
to attract its virtue and power, take thirty thrushes and behead them, and 
cook them until they are well done. Take them out when their feathers fall 
out of them, and salt them moderately and save them for use. Do this thirty 
days before the Moon enters into Virgo. Thereafter, each day eat one of 
them, after suffumigating it with four drachms of crocus; and after you have 
eaten it, you must not eat anything else until six hours have passed. 
Do this every day for thirty days, during which time you must also 
abstain from wine; at the end of this time, wash yourself in the water of 
an eastern spring, and from the water of the spring take some in a jug of 
medium size that was made while the Sun passed through the fourth degree 
and the Moon was in the seventh degree of Aquarius. Seal the mouth ofthe 
jug with wax that has never been touched by fire. 
When this is done, betake yourself to an ample place, and carry before 
you a thurible containing a quarter ounce each of incense and crocus; and say, 
"You, O Moon, are beautiful and positioned in aspect and copious in giving, 
great and high; your light illuminates the shadows and sends forth spirits, 
and your beauty gives joy to the heart. I beseech you and confide such and 
such a matter to you." Then take the aforesaid jug in your left hand, and say, 
"Haphot haphot," and dig with your right hand in the dirt, and continually 
say the aforesaid word while you dig. 
Do this until you have made a pit a cubit deep, and set the jug in it with 
its mouth pointing to the south side ofthe pit. Then fill the pit again with 
earth until its surface is level with the ground. While doing all this, say the 
aforementioned name continually. Afterward, draw the figure ofthe thing 
you want on a sheet of lead with a golden needle, and bury it at the top ofthe 
aforementioned pit. When you have done this, your petition will be fulfilled 
at once. 
When the Moon is in Libra. When the Moon is in Libra, and you wish 
to attract her virtue and power, gird yourself with a cord plaited from rushes 
ofthe sort that grow in water, go to the eastern bank of a river, and burn 
your sacrifice by the bank ofthe stream next to where the current of water 
funs, facing the Moon the whole time. In your hand you should hold a brass 
slingstonew' made when Venus was retrograde in Taurus and Mercury was in 
Aries. Do all this five times, going to the bank ofthe stream and returning 
each time. When this is done, strike the water of the stream with the 
slingstone, that is, when the sacrifice is burnt, and say: "You, O Moon, high 
386 
The sling was a common military weapon in ancient times, and 
ammunition for sTings was often cast from lead and other metals. 
EJfe Pfcattfp-JUber Jflubeiw CBDition 
and honored! To you I offer and send this sacrifice, and I do this in order to 
receive your grace, because you have power to grant to me my petition and to 
fulfill my desire." Then light a fire of wild olive wood, and throw storax onto 
it, and run in a circle around the fire as fast as you are able. Then you should 
prepare yourself in the place where you made the fire, and make a line in the 
earth from your feet to the fire, and on the line write this name: ganeytania 
ganeytania. Then take the earth in which you wrote the name, and mix it 
with earth and water that is not moving; and from this make two images, the 
other being in the form of anyone you wish.387 Let the images embrace one 
another, that is, ifyour working is for love, and if it is ordained to another 
purpose, make them in that manner. Let the making of the aforesaid image 
or images be done in the hour ofthe Moon, as quickly as they can be, and 
whatever you ask will be fulfilled. 
When the Moon is in Scorpio. When the Moon is in Scorpio and 
you wish to attract her virtue and power, rise up when the Moon is in the 
thirteenth degree of Scorpio and go to a place in which there are many dense 
trees, and many waters. Make a square figure on the ground, and cover it 
with the leaves of nut trees and leaves of citrons and pines; sprinkle all of it 
with rose water. Then put a new silver thurible before you, and in it pur some 
lignum aloes, storax, and incense, as much as you can. Then dress yourself in 
a garment of pure white in which no other color is mixed. 
When you have done this, set before you two clay thuribles full of water, 
and take a little clay pitcher, with which you should transfer water from one 
thurible to the other, and from the latter, pour water onto your sides with the 
pitcher. Make your sacrifice of animals pertaining to this sign. When this 
is done, stand on your feet, and four times prostrate yourself, and in each 
prostration say, "Seraphie seraphie."388 Then sit down again, and cast onto 
the top of the fire lignum aloes and incense, and put storax into whichever 
thurible you wish. Then prostrate yourself another four times as before. 
Then a rnan of seemly and perfect form will appear to you, whom you should 
ask whatsoever you will, and it shall be fulfilled as you desire. 
When the Moon is in Sagittarius. When the Moon is in Sagittarius, and 
you wish to attract its virtue and power (and the great sages considered this 
working to be a very strong and perfect work, and many of them practiced 
this working of Sagittarius to find treasures), and when you wish to do this, 
perform the following working when Mercury is in the fourth degree of 
Cancer. At that time melt ten pounds of brass, and out of it make five images 
in the form of dragons, and do this while Mercury remains in the degrees of 
the same sign. 
387 
The first image should be made in the form ofthe magician. 
388 
These words are "sarafiha, sarafiha" in the Arabic text. 
) 1 5 o o b 4 Chapter i 
239 
When the images are completed, proceed to a clear flowing stream, 
and divert water from that stream by five small channels that you make, 
which flow out one after another along the course ofthe stream wherever 
you wish. In each of these channels put one ofthe five images made in the 
form of dragons, as described earlie, so that the water flows into their tains 
and out of their mouths. Then take five wineskins and place each one at 
the mouth of one ofthe dragons, so that the water flows into the wineskins 
from the dragons' mouths, and leave them there for an hour. Then take the 
wineskins away from the mouths ofthe dragons, and let the water from those 
dragons flow out onto the earth for another hour after that. Again, return 
the wineskins to their original places (that is, each one of them to the image 
at which it was first situated), and allow the water flowing from the mouths 
of the dragons to flow into them for another hour. At the end of that hour 
take them away as before, and proceed to work in the same way until they are 
completely full. 
When they are full, go twenty palms back from the river with them, and 
when you have walked that far with them, the wineskins are to be placed on 
the ground in a circle. Each of them is to be pierced with a needle; and in 
the middle ofthe circle make a pit, into which the water going out ofthe 
wineskins may flow, and next to each wineskin one of the dragons is to be 
put. When all is completed in this manner, rise up and run back to the bank 
of the river, looking continually at the Moon, and take into your mouth as 
much of the river water as your mouth can hold; and run back to the place 
ofthe aforementioned wineskins, and sprinkle the wineskins and dragons 
with water from your mouth. Near each ofthe dragons place a thurible full 
of burning charcoal, into which you should put amber and lignum aloes, nor 
should the smoke be extinguished at any point while the water flows from the 
wineskins. 
When all the water is gone, take the dragons, put them in the wineskins, 
and bury them in the pit mentioned above, and cover them with earth. When 
this is accomplished, stand up at that place, and behead your sacrifice facing 
fifteen trees; and raise your head toward one ofthe trees, and as you do, say, 
Harmum harmum."38'; Say this word fifteen times, once to each ofthe trees, 
and then your petition will be fulfilled at once, because a man of beautiful 
appearance and good disposition will appear to you, who will lead you to the 
place in the four quarters ofthe world where you will find your desire. 
I say truthfully to you and I had a friend once, who did this working as 
I have given it here; and when the working was completed, a man appeared 
to him who asked him for his petition. He responded that his petition was 
this, that the man should show him an image by which lost treasures could 
389 
In the Arabic text, these words are "harqum, harqum." 
Zj8 
d i e Ptcatrir-iLlbet: Uubeiw Gftutlon 
be found. It seemed to him that the man took him by the hand, and led him 
to a certain place, where the man gave him the bronze image of an elephant 
which held an iron key between its forefeet and hind feet. It seemed to him 
then that the man said, "Take the elephant, and wander wherever it leads you, 
and in the place where the key falls from between his feet, you will know that 
treasure is to be found there." 
My friend took the elephant in his hands; and when he had proceeded, 
holding it, for a distance of four cubits, the key fell from between the feet of 
that elephant. At once he stopped, and dug a pit there, and in it he found that 
there were stairs. Descending them, he found a great house full of vessels of 
gold and silver, as well as precious stones. He took as much of the treasure as 
he could carry, and returned with an elephant, and thereby was able to carry 
the treasure away with him. 
When the Moon is in Capricorn. When the Moon is in Capricorn and 
you wish to attract its virtue and power, when the Sun appears in the sign of 
Cancer, you should go into a house only just large enough for two men, and 
cover it over for seven days with fragrant boughs (that is, each day you must 
renew the covering with fresh boughs). In each of those seven days, you shall 
suffumigate the aforesaid house with lignum aloes and incense. At the end 
of the seven days, go into that house dressed in a beautiful red garment, and 
you will see that in the house is a covered table or something like it; and when 
you wish, you may uncover it, and say, "Heyerim heyerim falsari falsari tifrat 
tifrat.',w" Then leave the house, and proceed in a circle around the house 
seven times. 
Then suffumigate the house with two ounces of lignum aloes in a silver 
thurible for the space of one hour. Then go outside it, and again go around 
the aforesaid house seven times as before. When you have done this, offer 
up your sacrifice of a chicken, as we have said many times already, and then 
again enter the house. There you will find a man sitting, to whom you must 
say three times: "I conjure you by the lovely and luminous Moon, adorned 
and honored, that you speak to me." Speak with him then, and ask him for 
whatever you wish, and it will be effectually accomplished. 
Now all that which by the operations of these chapters do, for the most 
part, may be done in order to acquire love. One of my close friends once had 
a handmaiden that he sold. After he sold her, he fell back in love with her, 
and asked the man to whom he had sold her if he could buy her back again, 
but the man refused to return her. Seeing that he would not be able to get 
her again in this way, he did the aforesaid work as just described; at once the 
man who owned her took a strong dislike to her. He sent a message to my 
390 
In the Arabic text, these words are "hajawam, hajawam, balgar, balgar 
naqaraw naqaraw. 
Boob 333 chapter 10 
>95 
friend asking him to buy her, according to his desire, for the price that had 
been agreed. Seeing, though, that the man was unhappy with her, my friend 
recovered her for a more modest price. The foundation of this working, 
however, and others ofthe same kind, is that the one who performs them be 
of good deeds and a follower of natural effects and far from all evil deeds; also 
let him be clean and clear from all voluptuousness and as secret as he possibly 
can be. 
Here, however, I wish to recount something that happened in our own 
time to one who wished to attract the virtue of the Moon, who performed 
this working for reasons of necessity, but spent a certain night living in a 
manner contradictory to this operation. On the night when he actually 
performed it, there appeared to him a man who had something in his hand, 
which he put in the mouth of the would-be magician; and at once his mouth 
was sealed up, so that he did not seem ever to have had a mouth. Thus he 
lingered for forty hours full of the greatest terror, at the end of which he 
perished utterly. 
When the Moon is in Aquarius. When the Moon is in Aquarius and 
you wish to attract her virtue and power—first you ought to read what all 
the ancient sages agreed, which is that the rules for these workings are those 
things that have been found to be useful in them. Therefore the rules and 
the workings joined together have the most effective results, and proceed 
straight to the desired end. When the rules are not added to the working, the 
greatest peril to body and spirit results, and when those who perform these 
workings do not know how to do them, there occur the greatest and most 
terrible dangers, which are frightful even to describe. This, I say to you, is to 
be taught and reproved: for no one should dare to meddle in this work unless 
they are of good memory and good quality. 
When the Moon is in this sign, then, and you wish to work, take the 
heads of three male ducks, which have been put on the fire in aged wine 
many years old until they are well done, and then grind them in an iron or 
lead mortar until they are all reduced to a single mass; and this is to be done 
when the Moon is in Cancer. Then add a pound and a half of cinnamon, 
two ounces of sandalwood, a pound and a half of dry storax, four ounces of 
•ncense, and a small amount of dragon's blood. Mix it all up along with the 
wine in which the heads were cooked; from it make forty pills, which you 
should put in an iron skillet over the fire until they are completely dry. 
At night, after you have done this, go into a field when the Moon is in 
Aquarius and her light is complete.3'" Set before you fifteen thuribles, which 
nay be of brass or silver, but it is considered better still if they are of gold; 
and all of them should be full of burning coals. Into each thurible cast one of 
391 
That is, on the night ofthe full moon. 
240 
Clje W a t t f J U b e r Kubeiw Edition 
the pills, and offer up a rooster in sacrifice, as above. While the smoke rises, 
a certain man will appear to you, who will now be visible to you and now 
be hidden, and this will happen quickly, very quickly. Then you should take 
three ofthe aforesaid pills, and cast them into the fire, and say, "Hantaraceret 
hantaraceret.""2 Repeat these words ten times. Then you will see that man 
clearly, and make your petition to him; and it will be effectually fulfilled. 
When the Moon is in Pisces. When the Moon is in Pisces, and you 
wish to attract her virtue and power, take one and a fifth pounds of hemp 
juice, and the same amount of the sap of the plane tree, and mix them 
together. You should extract these fluids from the plants when the Sun is 
in Virgo and Mercury is luminous and direct in motio; and the extraction 
should be done in a marble mortar. When this is done, add four ounces of 
mastic, two ounces each of amber and camphor, one ounce of alkali,3'" and 
ten ounces of sarcocolla. All these are to be well blended together, and to 
them you should add half a pound ofthe blood of a deer beheaded with a 
brass knife. 
When all this has been mixed together, put it into a glass vessel. Then 
go to a place where there is a spring of flowing water, and carry the aforesaid 
glass vessel to the spring by its handle. Then take one thurible, and put it 
on a stone in the midst ofthe water of the aforesaid spring, so that there is 
flowing water all around the thurible. Then set fire burning in the thurible; 
and as it burns, open the mouth ofthe glass vessel, and empty the aforesaid 
vessel into the fire, that is, a little at a time, until all of it has been poured 
out into the fire. Then offer your sacrifice. The servant of the Moon will 
then appear to you, to whom you should make your petition, and it will be 
brought to you effectually. 
Great miracles and great effects, according to the Hindus, are in 
suffumigations, which they call calcitarat; and with them are worked the 
effects of the seven planets. These suffumigations ought to be used according 
to the nature ofthe planet to which the petition corresponds. 
First, of Saturn. When you wish to work by means of Saturn, fast 
for seven days, beginning on the Lord's day. On the seventh day, that is, 
Saturday, behead a black crow, and say, "In the name of Anzil,3'4 who is placed 
with Saturn. You, Anzil, who are the angel of Saturn! I conjure you by the 
Lord of high heaven that you will hear my petition and my desire." Then 
work with a calcitarat for what you will. 
392 
In the Arabic text, these words are "hantar asrak hantar asrak." 
393 
Impure potassium hydroxide, extracted by soaking wood ashes in water. 
394 
In the Arabic text, this angel is named Asbil. 
)l0oob 4 Chapter 2 
241 
The figures of Saturn are these: 
D X h C C 
• 
When you wish to work by means of Jupiter, fast for seven days as above, 
beginning on a Friday. At the end of those days, that is, on Thursday, behead 
a lamb and eat its liver, and say, "You, Roquiel,w the angel who is placed with 
Jupiter the fortunate and good, and in the greater fortune, perfect and lovely! 
By the Lord of high heaven, I conjure you that you will receive my prayer and 
petition, deigning to grant that which I ask you to perform." Then work with 
a calcitarat for what you will. The figures of Jupiter are these: 
When you wish to work by means of Mars, fast for seven days beginning 
on a Wednesday. At the end ofthe seven days, that is, on Tuesday, behead 
a spotted cat, and say, "You, Zemeyel,,% angel of Mars, you are strong and 
powerful and the lord of burning fire and warriors and lawsuits! I conjure 
you by the Lord of high heaven that you receive my petition and do such and 
such for me, so as to accomplish it effectually." Here speak your petition, and 
work with a calcitarat for whatever you seek. These are the figures of Mars: 
< S > = C D S 8 
Now when you wish to work by means of the Sun, you should fast 
for 
seven days as before, beginning on a Monday. On the last day, that is, 
the Lord's day, behead a young calf and eat its liver, and say, "You, Yebil,1'1" 
angel ofthe Sun, the light of Him who is the goodness ofthe world, lord of 
radiance and light; he who is perfect fortune, and by him misfortune and 
detriment are made. I conjure you by the Lord of high heaven that you do 
this for me, and fulfill this my petition." Then ask for what you wish, and 
work with a calcitarat for what you desire. These are the figures ofthe Sun: 
395 
In the Arabic text, Rufija'il. 
396 
In the Arabic text, Rubija'il. 
397 
In the Arabic text, Bail. 
242 
Kfyz ^icattrw-IL'tber Hubeu* CBDition 
When you wish to work by means ofVenus, fast beginning on a Saturday 
until the following Friday. On Friday, behead a white dove, but on the fourth 
day eat its liver, and say, "You, Anbetayl,w* angel ofVenus, fortunate and 
beautiful! By the Lord of high heaven, I conjure you, that you do this for 
me and accomplish my petition." Ask for what you wish, and work with a 
calcitarat for what you seek. These are the figures ofVenus: 
IXlX^fT^lg V. 
When you wish to work by means of Mercury, fast for seven days, as 
above, beginning on a Thursday. On the last day, that is, Wednesday, behead 
a black and white rooster and eat its liver, and say, "You, Arquil,w angel of 
Mercury, lord of noble and good qualities! By the Lord of high heaven, I 
conjure you, that you will do and fulfill this for me." Here say your petition, 
and work with a calcitarat. These are the figures of Mercury: 
uc^fHvmt*--. 
When you wish to work by means of the Moon, you should fast for seven 
days beginning on a Tuesday. On the last day, that is, Monday, behead a 
sheep and eat its liver, and say, "You, Cahil,""'" angel ofthe Moon, whose key 
is goodness and whose principle is rapidity! By the Lord of high heaven, I 
conjure you, that you do this for me and accomplish this my petition." Say 
your petition, and work with a calcitarat for that which you desire. These are 
the figures ofthe Moon: 
All of the aforementioned sages of old knew these workings, and in them 
are many effects in working magic, that is, in miraculous suffumigations 
and images. Many ofthe Chaldeans, who dwelt in the Promised Land and 
who at that time were called Capri,41" were virtuosi in these workings. Of 
398 
In the Arabic text, Bita'i. 
399 
In the Arabic text, Harqil. 
400 
In the Arabic text, Salja'il. 
401 
A fascinating tidbit. Capt—Caphtor in Hebrew, Keftiu in ancient 
Egyptian—was the name ofthe island ofCrete in the days ofthe Minoan civilization. 
The Chaldeans, however, were an Aramaic-speaking people of Mesopotamia who 
seem to have had no connection to Crete. 
Boob 333 Chapter 10 
24 
these workings, a great many are found in the book called The Chaldean 
Agriculture. Abenvasia, who translated this book, published all these works. 
We, however, in this book of ours, intend to recount some of them. 
Chapter Three 
What the Chaldeans held to be the profundities and secrets of this 
science, and what they said about it 
C
he Chaldeans, indeed, were those magi who made themselves 
preeminent in this science and these workings; and they are held to 
have been entirely perfect in this science. They themselves assert 
that Hermes first constructed a certain house of images, from which he used 
to measure of the flow of the Nile at the Mountains ofthe Moon; but this 
house was made ofthe Sun.4"2 He used to hide himself there from men in 
such a way that no one who was with him was able to see him. 
He also it was who built, in the east of Egypt, a city twelve miles in 
length, in which he built a certain citadel that had four gates in its four 
quarters. At the eastern gate he put the image of an eagle, at the western 
gate the image of a bull, at the southern gate the image of a lion, and at the 
northern gate he built the image of a dog. He made certain spiritual essences 
enter into these, which used to speak in voices that issued from the images; 
nor could anyone pass through the portals without their permission. In that 
city he planted certain trees, in the midst of which he set up an arbor that 
bore the fruits of all generation. 
At the summit of the citadel he caused to be built a certain tower, which 
attained a height of thirty cubits, and on the summit of it he commanded to 
be put a sphere, the color of which changed in every one ofthe seven days. 
At the end of the seven days it received the color it had at first. Every day, 
that city was filled with the color of that sphere, and thus the aforesaid city 
used to shine every day with color. 
Around that tower, in a circle, water abounded, in which many kinds of 
fish used to live. Around the city he placed diverse and changing images, by 
means of which the inhabitants ofthe city were made virtuous and freed from 
sin, wickedness and sloth. The name of this city was Adocentyn.''", Its people 
were most deeply learned in the ancient sciences, their profundities and 
402 
"The Mountains ofthe Moon" was the ancient and medieval name for the 
Ruwenzori range of East Africa, where the White Nile has its headwaters. 
403 
In the Arabic text, al-Asmunain. 
C&e $icatrto~!Lffler Hubeufi (ftrttfon 
secrets, and in the science of astronomy. 
I have seen, however, a certain composition to conceal people, which 
is made in this way. When you desire to do this, take one rabbit on the 
24th night ofthe Arabian month,41"1 and behead it facing the Moon, and 
continually looking at her. Suffumigate with the suffumigation ofthe Moon, 
saying the words of the Moon given above; and then say: "I call you, angelic 
spirit of magic and all that is hidden, you who are called Salmaquil! By this 
I supplicate you, who distributes your virtue and power and strength in 
this work, that you will deign to give what I ask of you, out of those things 
attributed to your power." 
When you have said this, take the blood ofthe aforementioned rabbit, 
which you should mix with its bile. You should bury its body so that nobody 
is able to see it, because if you go away and anyone uncovers it in the daytime, 
that is, when the Sun is elevated above it, the spirit of the Moon will kill 
you. The blood, when you have taken it and mixed it with the bile, should be 
taken away with you and kept for use. 
When you wish to hide yourself and be seen by nobody, take some of 
the blood and bile mixed as above, in the hour ofthe Moon, and anoint 
your face with it; and do not cease to say the aforementioned words ofthe 
Moon, because while you say them you will make yourself totally hidden 
from the sight of others, and in this way you will be able to achieve whatever 
you desire. When, however, you wish to be seen and become visible again to 
others, cease to say the same words, and wash your face, and anoint it with 
the brain of the aforesaid rabbit, and say, "You, O spirit ofthe Moon, reveal 
me and make me appear to people." Then everyone will see you. This is 
among the works of the Moon, and is considered one ofthe great secrets and 
profundities of this science. 
Chapter Four 
The images and reasonings that greatly further this science 
11 that has been said up to this point in this book of ours, we have 
1 3 ® repeated from the sayings ofthe ancient sages and their books 
^discussing this science and work, and extracted from these same 
sources. He who reads these books, however, and closely studies them, 
and grasps all that we have said up to this point, will truly understand and 
404 
The months of the Arabs begin on the first night in which the new moon is 
visible at Mecca. 
)15oob 4 Chapter 4 
recognize the labor that we have done in compiling this book out of diverse 
books dealing with this science, which are the foundations of this work. 
One ofthe most perfect books of this science that we have found is a 
volume that was revealed by Hermes the sage at the founding of Babylon, and 
in this was a book of aphorisms called The Secret of SecretsFrom 
it we have 
selected 45 aphorisms41"' which are considered of great value in this science 
and these workings. 
The first of them is this: If you work on those things which pertain to a 
planet, and draw upon those things that are of the nature ofthe planet with 
which you desire to work, and do not depart from this, you will have the 
greatest assistance in attracting the strength, virtue, and power of that planet. 
2. Ask from the Sun to be feared and have glory, the command of armies, 
courage, rule over lords, the destruction of kings, the lighting of fires, and the 
virtue of shining light into shadows. 
3. Ask from the Moon agility of motion, the movement of waters, the 
virtue of making known what is secret, extinguishing fires, diminishing 
whatever can be set in motion, and separating those who are of a united 
opinion. 
4. Ask from Saturn the hindering of motion, the concealment of purity, 
the destruction of cities, humility of the heart, and quieting of waters. 
5. Ask from Jupiter increase of riches, beautifying of dreams, fleeing from 
sloth, forsaking sorrows, labors and strife, and making journeys safely either 
by sea or by land. 
6. Ask from Mars the conquest of enemies, fortitude of heart, causing evil 
animals to hunger and prepare themselves, lighting fires, arranging wars, and 
having victory over enemies. 
7. Ask from Venus the desire for copulation, the virtue of causing loves 
and enthusiasms and expelling sorrow and sloth, invigorating the appetite, 
increasing generation, multiplying children, extinguishing fire, and being safe 
from animals.407 
8. You should make many suffumigations, have perfect faith, fast often, 
utter many prayers, choose a place appropriate to the work, and observe the 
aspects ofthe planets. These are the foundations of magical workings. 
9. Your petition will be quickly fulfilled if the planet to which you make 
your petition is the lord of your nativity, without this, it will be harder for 
your petition to proceed to its proper conclusion. 
405 
The Secret of Secrets, or Secretum Secretorum, was one of the more famous 
medieval handbooks of astrological magic; it was usually attributed to Aristotle, rather 
than Hermes. 
406 
There are only 44 aphorisms; one referring to the properties ofthe planet 
Mercury was omitted below by scribal error at some point. 
407 
The aphorism about Mercury should appear at this point. 
24 6 
C&e ^icatrir-Jitter Kubeiw flftrttton 
10. Spirits have the power to strengthen the effects of a planet and 
ameliorate its qualities, or to the contrary, to lessen and worsen its effects and 
scatter its powers. 
11. If the ascendant differs from the nature of the petition, the petition 
will not be fulfilled, nor will prayer attain that which it seeks. 
12. The images ofthe fixed stars are considered more enduring in 
their effects than the images of those things that are capable of retrograde 
motion.4"11 
13. If you do a planetary working with the aid of some fixed star of the 
same nature, it will be more complete and more perfect because it will have 
the vigor of the planet and the endurance ofthe fixed star. 
14. When the ascendant, the petition, and the planet are of one nature, 
and you aid yourself therein with a fixed star, and you have firm belief and 
will, your petition will swiftly be fulfilled, and it will be strengthened from 
the vigor of the planet. 
15. The fixed star Altair assists with movement, while Vega helps with 
rest. 
16. Diligently study the conjunctions of the planets, for this work is very 
greatly augmented by them. 
17. In the aspects ofthe planets, as much as in their conjunctions, the 
foundations of images consist. 
18. Put the significator at the midheaven, in its house or exaltation, and 
see to it that there is a fortitude on the ascendant. 
19. Assist your work with the Sun when you wish to conquer and surpass 
someone; then your petition will more swiftly be completed and will increase. 
20. Assist your work with the Moon when you wish to retain something; 
then your petition will more swiftly be completed and will increase. 
21. Assist your work with Saturn when you wish to bring down 
something, and to cause evil; then your petition will more swiftly be 
completed and will increase. 
22. Assist your work with Jupiter when you wish to ascend to good 
things; then your petition will more swiftly be completed and will increase. 
23. Assist yourself with Mars when you wish to win, in peace as well as in 
war; then your petition will more swiftly be completed and will increase. 
24. Assist yourself with Venus whe you wish to seek love and friendship; 
then your petition will more swiftly be completed and will increase. 
25. Assist yourself with Mercury when you wish to know and understand, 
or to expel moisture; then your petition will more swiftly be completed and 
408 
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn at times appear to move 
backward in the heavens; unlike the fixed stars, the Sun, and the Moon, which always 
proceed in the same direction. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 4 
will increase. 
26. Delay in results from a petition comes from an error in your 
performance ofthe working, or your lack of faith, or disorder in the structure 
ofthe working. 
27. Workings done with the suffumigations and prayers proper to them 
are better than those in which the suffumigations are insufficient and the will 
is divided. 
28. The light of the Sun and the projection of its rays interfere with the 
spirits of the nocturnal planets. 
29. The darkness of night and the stillness of motion interfere with the 
spirits of the diurnal planets. Thus you ought to comply with each planet 
according to its timing, and according to that which is proper to it. 
30. A heavy planet, while it is slower, has a more powerful effect than a 
lighter planet, though the latter has quicker effects. 
31. You should not seek union from Mars, just as you should not seek 
separation from Venus; do not seek anything from the planets that deviates 
from their natures and their paths. 
32. You may work with comets in those things that pertain to them, 
when they appear, in the same manner as fixed stars. 
33. Seek from Mercury what is governed by the sign in which it is placed, 
and invoke the Moon along with it. In this way you will have two qualities. 
34. You should invoke Mercury for illnesses of the head, according to 
their diverse qualities. 
35. In workings of Mercury, you may seek quickness of the tongue when 
he is in his own house. 
36. It sometimes happens that those things that pertain to Mars are 
received by the Sun, and likewise that the things pertaining to the Sun are 
received by Mars. 
37. It sometimes happens that those things that pertain to the Moon 
are received by Venus and the things pertaining to Venus are received by the 
Moon. 
38. The Sun abhors those things that pertain to Saturn, and the things 
that pertain to the Sun are abhorrent to Saturn. 
39. Venus abhors those things pertaining to Jupiter, and the things that 
pertain to Venus are abhorrent to Jupiter. 
40. The Moon abhors things pertaining to Mars and Mars abhors things 
pertaining to the Moon. 
41. Jupiter abhors things pertaining to Mars, and Mars abhors things 
Pertaining to Jupiter. 
42. Mars also abhors things pertaining to Venus, and Venus abhors things 
pertaining to Mars. 
248 
ID&e PlcatriF-Jliber Uubeiw (ftlttton 
43. Mercury abhors things pertaining to Jupiter and Jupiter abhors things 
pertaining to Mercury. 
44. It may be seen from the opinions of the sages that the two infortunes 
are inimical to each other because of the diversity and discord between their 
essential natures. 
All these things you ought to know and understand perfectly. We have 
chosen these aphorisms out ofthe works of the aforesaid sage. We have also 
chosen the following ten aphorisms from the book of Ptolemy named The 
Centiloquium.',m 
The first of these is: The astrologer can hold back and oppose many of 
the effects ofthe stars and their natures if he knows them and their works and 
understands their effects. He can make it happen those things receptive to 
the stars receive his influences before they receive those of the stars. 
2. The spirit ofthe magician furthers the effects of the heavens just as the 
harvests of nature—that is, in the way that harvests are furthered by plowing 
and cultivating the earth. 
3. The forms of this composite world are obedient to the forms of heaven, 
and from this, those who are learned in magical arts command that forms be 
made when the planets are in the equivalent celestial forms, when they wished 
to understand this science. 
4. You may make use of the infortunes, and help yourself with them to 
achieve your desires, just as physicians are helped by carefully making use of 
poisonous substances in combination with others. 
5. The combination of two substances in one thing embraces both 
substances and their nativities. If there is a similarity in them, there will be a 
union between them; and whichever one of them is in the stronger place will 
gain the primacy and lordship, and whichever is in the weaker place will be its 
servant and receiver. 
6. Friendship and enmity are received from the places of the Sun and 
Moon, in their origin and permutation, and from the harmony or diversity 
ofthe ascendants ofthe friends or enemies. Obedient signs, however, are 
stronger in friendship. 
7. In founding a city, make use of fixed stars, and in building a house, 
make use of planets. The inhabitants of a city founded when Mars or another 
star of its nature is at the midheaven, though, will perish by fire and sword. 
8. All that is and becomes in this world, that is, by means of generation 
and corruption, is caused by the 120 conjunctions41" that the seven planets 
409 
The Centiloquium or Liber Fructus are 100 aphorisms traditionally 
attributed to Ptolemy, the most famous ofthe astrologers of antiquity. 
410 
There are a total of 120 possible conjunctions between two or more of 
the seven classical planets, and a branch of astrological theory once accounted for 
everything in existence by means of these conjunctions. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 4 
make. In all the effects of these conjunctions, the receptive form is to be 
observed; for from this form, the effect is completed. 
9. The Sun is the source ofthe animal power; the Moon ofthe natural 
power; Saturn of the retentive power; Jupiter ofthe power of growth; 
Mercury of the power of judgment; Mars ofthe power of sharpness and 
anger; and Venus is the source of the power of desire. 
10. Mars, Mercury, and Venus in nativities signify the will and manners 
of those nativities and display their works and magisteries. 
In the books of philosophy published by Plato we find the saying that 
none besides Jupiter reveals the truth. In another place he says that as blood, 
choler, black bile, and phlegm are the elements ofthe body, the virtues of 
these elements proceed from the planets, and so the action of one humor 
on another and the reception of one humor by another in the beginning 
of generation is from the planets. In still another place, he says that when 
truth is lacking in the science of astrology,411 it is because the time has not 
been determined, or the place, or it happens because of discord between the 
active factors, or the astrologer has made an error. On this account, however, 
the demonstrations of astrology are different from those derived from omens 
or the flight of birds, because in these latter, what is to come reveals itself. 
Because of this, both that which is occurs, and that which is not appears. 
In the book of philosophy by Hippocrates we find: When Jupiter is the 
lord ofthe solar year, in that year there will be few illnesses and much health, 
and the generations of animals will be multiplied. 
We find this in the books of Aristotle: Kingship is attributed to Saturn, 
justice to Jupiter, eagerness to Venus, judgment to Mercury, labors to the 
Moon, and pride to Mars. 
You ought to know, however, that we recite all the aforesaid in this place 
only so that you will learn and understand what the aforesaid sages used to 
think concerning the profundities and secrets of this art, and that all of them 
were as one in this, that from these things they were able to attain the goal 
they desired. 
Johannicius son of Isaac translated the book of Aristotle, the master of 
the Greeks, which I have seen, and I propose to repeat here some of what he 
said concerning the sayings of the wise and the profundities of their judgment 
as well as the conclusions of their intellects, which you ought to understand. 
T^ere is a certain thing in the first volume of his book which I have read, and 
1 will repeat part of it here. 
Some of the sages, discussing this art, have said: Every working and every 
magistery has a door through which, by understanding, they may be entered; 
4 1 1 
Hie text has astronomia here, but the modern distinction between 
sstronomy and astrology did not yet exist in medieval times. 
250 
Che iHcatrir&iber Hiibeu s d&tttion 
and each of them has a stair, by which an ascent may be made to the thing 
desired. They have also said this: None may attain what they seek without 
order and discipline. And this: When you whine about something, a danger 
is bom in it."12 
All the wise philosophers in this science have said: The art of magic must 
be given by God and by the celestial virtues. They that say this say also that 
no one can be a magician unless he is illuminated by knowledge, because 
ofthe difficulties ofthe art, as well as the profundities that he must be able 
to understand. Yet this work and science, which has been perfected by the 
sages, and which must be studied thoroughly in the right way, is revealed to 
everyone. 
The beginning of this science is the knowledge of the figures of the stars 
ascending in the heavens, and to know what figure is represented by them, 
and is revealed apart from others, and that it is not figured by them except 
to perfect another figure by augmenting its members. When, however, you 
have learned these figures and their natures, according to the nature of the 
terrestrial things that pertain to their nature, that is, in the figures of living 
things according to their harmony and proportion with celestial figures, you 
will be able to work. If you carefully attend to the proper harmony, and 
harmoniously join figures together and prepare them, they will be the first 
matter and foundation of this work. 
When images are fashioned in this way, they will be lasting and complete 
in their effects, and if they are not fashioned in this way, their effects will be 
destroyed by the destruction of their terrestrial material and the destruction 
of the composition thereof. Durability comes from the fixed stars, but images 
have a better nature and a better effect when they are made with the planets, 
and the effects are more durable when a planet aspects a fortune, which 
augments the same with the strength and potency it draws to Earth from the 
heavens. 
There are certain words among the names of God that make spirits 
descend from the heavens to the Earth. Those who work with these names 
and words, if they are not wise and learned in the nature of spiritual and 
celestial things, will be killed by the descending power of the spirit; and for 
this reason no one ought to work with these names except those who who 
are known to be wise and have received grace. In magical workings there are^ 
also words that work in the same manner, but these magical words and nanie 
are not perfect unless the virtue, commandment and grace of God are joine 
to them. When this is done, the highest heavens descend and are joine t 
4T2 
In eo quod queritur, bericidiim genemtur. Clearly Johaiiniciiis had to 
. 
contend with the same attitudes in his students that more recent teachers or 1 'b 
face in theirs. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
251 
terrestrial matter, all the way down to the center of the Earth. 
An image primarily works according to the natural substance from which 
it is supposed to be made, but it cannot be made without words that have 
magical virtues. As far as you can, see that there is no enmity or discord 
between natures and figures in the properties of the work. For example, a 
magister who makes the image of a lion ought to be brave and vigorous, nor 
should he fear any animal that exists in nature; on the contrary, he ought 
to be a man who has encountered a lion, and knows and understands its 
nature, and realizes that others may be led by it into anger and ill will. Here, 
however, the ancient sages are not entirely in accord; but when the foregoing 
things are done as we have said, they will achieve the desired end. 
Likewise, when you wish to create such an image, you should do this 
at a time when the corresponding animal is active and when its nature is 
invigorated; for in this way the power of the image will be strengthened. 
Likewise, see to it that during the time in which you make the image, no 
accident happens to you. For example, with the lion: do not make the image 
of a lion at a time when a fever happens to one; for in this case the work if the 
image will be deficient in virtue. 
All the motions ofthe heavens are moved in terrestrial figures by the 
virtue of God. For this reason you should observe the motion ofthe star 
from which you wish the image to receive durability of virtue, so that it is 
not hindered while the image is being made. Likewise, you should observe 
two figures, that is, the degree of the sign of the planet that governs the 
work ofthe figure, and the motion thereof, so that they are not hindered by 
anythin, because when the planet moves freely in its heaven, the virtues of the 
image are moved, proceeding, returning, rising, and setting in the same way. 
Likewise pay the closest attention to conjunctions, oppositions, and aspects in 
constructing images, and be sure that their figures are manifested in heaven, 
and the contraries to the same be hidden. You should know that if you do 
n o t observe the aforesaid rules in constructing images, their effects will be 
imperfect. 
Geber Abenhayen, speaking of this science, said: The work of images is 
^imilar to the effects of nature, nor can it be done without the necessity of 
lowing the things pertaining to the stars among animals, trees, and stones; 
erstanding the aspects of the planets and stars, and also the signs, to 
errestrial places; the science of astronomy, the motions ofthe heavens, the 
fsnips and exaltations of the planets, their longitudes and latitudes, the 
r . S 1 0 n s ofthe Moon; the nature of places on earth and their waters, soils, 
lls> snows, and their lands, seas and seasons, and what places are far from 
eSuator; which living things generate more of their kind, and which 
CCts 
living things, whether reptiles or others, are more permanent; and 
2J2 
C&e l^icatriF-iUber Hubetw d^Dttton 
when living things are not generated and when they are generated; for in 
constructing images with this knowledge, the work will be easy, because no 
difficulties will arise therein. 
In making the aforesaid natures (that is, in workings with images) it 
should be kept in mind that images made of stone are more durable than 
those made of vegetable or animal substances, because wood burns readily 
and animals putrefy. The effects upon animals are twofold—that is, one is 
to gather them and increase their number, and the other is to disperse and 
repel them. These are appropriate for different times, as they involve different 
motions—that is, there is a time for gathering and growth, and a time for 
dispersing and repelling. This may be considered under the heading ofthe 
opposition of degrees. In stones a certain supreme secret is hidden, that is, 
when any animal—that is, if you want it to depart—is hot in its nature, the 
stone ought to be cold; if the animal is moist, the stone ought to be dry, and 
vice versa. From this it should be understood that if you wish vipers and 
wasps to flee, the work ought to be done in cornelian and diamond and the 
like; but if they are cold by nature, such as scorpions, beetles, flies, lice, and 
things similar to them, work with hot stones such as malachite and crystal, 
and in bronze and gold and the like. 
This is for the working to make them flee. Workings to draw and 
increase them ought to be done with things that are harmonious and 
pertinent to them, as in working with vipers, you should work with gold 
and bronze and similar things. All this happens because ofthe harmony of 
complexion, the direction of movement, and the diversity of conjunctions 
and substances. The figure and form ought to be in the form and figure ofthe 
animal for which it is made, as a figure for mice in the shape of a mouse, one 
for serpents in the shape of a serpent, or one for scorpions in the shape of a 
scorpion. 
I say to you further that, if the quantity of stone of which an image is 
composed is large (that is, between an ounce and a pound), the virtue and 
power of it will be able to reach from the place where it is for a hundred 
leagues. If it contains a combination of things in its figure, however, its 
nature will have no motion or effect except that which terminates in its own 
place, though its motion or effect will not be limited to those of its substance 
or the nature ofthe bodies that compose it, for spirits have a wider range than 
those bodies that contain little spirit. 
Plato said this: bodies and spirits are contraries, because out ofthe life of 
each one proceeds the burden of the other. He wrote after this: You ought 
to endure the death of your body for the sake ofthe life of your spirit, that 
is, the body should be the handmaid ofthe spirit, and should serve the spirit 
in its generation and in all its works. Do not allow your spirit to serve your 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
255 
body in any way, nor kill the dead on account ofthe life of the living, nor kill 
that which is living out of love ofthe dead. 
They then asked him: how is it that the spirit that moves the heart is 
killed? To this he responded: Seeing that nature, by its powers, moves the 
rational and animal spirits according to the manifest similarity of nature 
that is in them, according to the body, this is therefore the spirit that ordains 
friendship, love, and victory. At times thereafter, nature joins the divided 
parts, and at other times, it divides the united parts. Thence, when nature 
is moved in a uniting motion (I mean to speak here ofthe conjunction of 
parts), then two spirits are joined in the love that is proper to spirit, and they 
are united with the rational intellect. That which is spiritual is first, and 
thereby it may behold the cause of this world; and it is thus made pure and 
simple. When nature is moved by a separating motion, however, it attracts to 
itself an animal spirit and enters into friendship with the corporeal. 
Thus in the fulfillment of its victory the rational spirit rejoices and reigns 
on account of its similarity to the subtle, by which, because of its rational 
ordering, it is affected. The animal spirit likewise rejoices when parts and 
hearts are divided, on account of its similarity to the division of natural parts. 
This is because spirit, when it is in itself, has marvelous forms which a spirit 
attracted toward nature cannot have; and thence the motive power of nature 
helps in its bodily substance (I mean to speak here ofthe bodies of hearts, 
and their weight), and thus perishes the moving spirit of those figures that are 
not able to be attracted by reason. Spirit attracts them instead by figures and 
subtle motions and visions of the eye and other members ofthe body. 
You, however, who propose to labor at this science, should accustom your 
spirit and your thoughts to those things in which these men used to exercise 
themselves, and so struggle with your spirit that you may attain the things 
that the aforementioned men attained. This indeed is what the ancient sages 
used to teach about spirit, waking and sleeping, saying: Make your spirits 
accustomed to visions, because they can occur to you often, and by them may 
be gained in sleep what you will hardly ever be able to attain while awake. 
This should be understood: when the manifest senses are awake, the 
hidden senses are debilitated, nor are they able to accomplish their effects. 
When the manifest senses sleep and do not function, however, then the 
hidden senses function, according to the vigor of contemplation, imagination, 
memory, and judgment that exists in the spirit. Then the vigor of judgment 
is simple, nor is it impeded by any impediment. Then, heat is hidden away, 
and while it is hidden, the superfluities ofthe body melt away. You who seek 
after this science should know, however, that when you accustom your spirit 
to the aforesaid, then in time, visions will be made manifest to you, and it will 
be necessary for you to understand in seeking them. 
254 
C&e PicatriF-Jliber Kubeit* Litton 
Chapter Five 
The ten sciences that are necessary to this art, and how this 
science is helped by them, and what is the foundation of the 
science of magic 
he ancient sages who discovered this art, not without searching with 
continual labor and testing all things, while waking and sleeping, 
persevered until they attained what they desired. In following this 
path, they learned and understood two conclusions, and the first of these is 
that there are ten arts you must know, of which five are considered necessary 
to the student of law, and five to the student of philosophy/" 
The first of these comprises agriculture, seafaring, and governing the 
people, because these are the principal arts in governing cities and kingdoms. 
These cannot be learned except from the ancient sciences, which may be 
found in a great many books. 
After this is the art of leading soldiers, commanding armies, engaging in 
combats and battles, calling animals and birds, and deceiving them.'"'1 These 
may also be found in a great many books. 
After these are the civilized arts by which people are helped; and among 
these are grammar, the division of languages, legal reasoning, making reasons 
and rulings understood,113 and all that proceeds from these, such as writing 
and everything that pertains to them, buying and selling, and so forth. These 
may be found in a great many books. 
Thereafter follows arithmetic, and all books by which numbers and 
similar things are known. Next in order is geometry, which consists of 
theory and practice; from this comes surveying, lifting heavy objects, making 
machines, leading water from one place to another, aerial instruments, and 
making and using burning mirrors. Next comes astronomy, by which the 
course ofthe planets and the judgment ofthe stars are known. After this 
music is distinguished, under which is included singing, playing, and writing 
notes. 
After this is dialectic, which is divided into eight books, into which 
Aristotle the sage invites us to enter.''16 
413 
A great many more than ten arts are listed here, and no straightforward 
division into ten categories can be found in the text. 
414 
The latter two belong to the art of hunting, which medieval authors often, 
and quite reasonably, considered a kind of warfare. 
415 
That is, rhetoric. 
416 
That is, logic. The reference to Aristotle in this case is correct; his books on 
logic formed the standard textbooks on the subject for centuries. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
255 
After this is medicine, which is divided into two parts, that is, theory and 
practice. 
After this follow the natural sciences, which Aristotle and other wise 
philosophers have set forth. About this, a great many books can be found, 
which require many glosses and much exposition; of these the first is called 
the Oydus of Nature; second, the Book of Heaven and Earth; third, the Book 
of Generation and Corruption; fourth, the Book of Signs that Appear in the 
Heavens, fifth, the Book of Minerals, sixth, the Book of Vegetables; seventh, 
the Book ofthe Motion of Animals (that is, from one place to another).41" 
After this follows metaphysics, of which Aristotle wrote in thirty books. 
Whoever thoroughly understands and perfectly learns these things is a 
complete sage, and will achieve perfection in the things he desires. 
After this, the two conclusions we have mentioned follow directly out 
of the aforesaid ten arts; for whoever does not know these ten arts cannot 
attain to these conclusions. From what we have said so far, you ought to 
rouse yourself, and ascend by necessity to the knowledge of all the sciences 
listed above, because when you make yourself perfect in them, you will attain 
what the ancient sages attained, and you will understand the workings of the 
sages and the spiritual sciences, and you will accomplish what they used to 
accomplish. And when your effort toward spirit equals that which used to be 
in your animal powers, you will receive all this from the grace of the Highest. 
This is that which is comprehended in the secret sayings ofthe prophets. 
From this follows love; for in love, the greatest powers are found. Note, 
however, that love is twofold; there is love acquired through virtue, and love 
imbued with vice. It is of love acquired through virtue that we speak here, 
and you ought to seek to acquire none other. Love imbued with vice is 
corporeal love of a flawed and material form; from this kind of love, therefore, 
you ought to flee as far as you can. 
It is said in the books ofthe wise that the proportionate and harmonious 
binding of spirit consists primarily of love. The human spirit is divided into 
three parts, that is: the animal spirit, the natural spirit, and the rational 
spirit. If the natural spirit of a man has conquered the others, he will be a 
lover of such things as food and drink, and nothing else; if the animal spirit 
has conquered the others, he will be a lover of nothing but conquering and 
surpassing others; while if the rational spirit conquers, he will be a lover of 
nothing but intellect, goodness, and knowledge. 
This happens, however, only because a certain planet presides over his 
nativity, and such a planet is called the lord of the nativity. Thus you should 
know that if the Moon or Venus is the lord of someone's nativity, that person 
417 
Most of these are books on natural science by Aristotle. "Oydus" derives 
from Greek hodos, "way" or "path." 
C&e ^atrfe-IUber Uubeu t CBDttlon 
will be a lover of women and enjoyments. If the Sun or Mars is the lord of 
the nativity, that person will be a lover of overcoming and defeating; but 
if it be Jupiter or Mercury, such a person will be a lover of knowledge and 
learning, and understanding good things, and goodness and justice. Because 
of the foregoing, whatever someone is will be as visible in his nature as in his 
love. 
Love which turns toward terrestrial things is acquired by sight, and by 
means of sight it continues to grow, as wheat in the earth grows from its 
seed, and as a tree when it is planted, and as animal sperm when it is received 
by the womb. Sight, therefore, is like a raw material in this, for in sight is 
found the principle of this kind of love, so that by being near the beloved, 
and beholding her face, this kind of love grows and increases, and when the 
lover is united with her, their spirits are made one. This is corporeal love 
between two spirits, in which the harmony of friendship in them is called 
love. If it is love in the rational spirit, however, the lover will be delighted by 
that which is ofthe same kind, that is, wisdom, knowledge, goodness, stable 
virtues, and eternal things, of which it is said there is no end; and this love of 
goodness, nobility and exaltation is deservedly attributed to the rational spirit. 
The other loves of which we have spoken are evil and deserve to be forsaken, 
because in them is wickedness of spirit, and from such friendshipand such 
unification of spirits, and the continuation thereod, it may be seen to be 
corrupted and destroyed. 
Plato, in his book On The Soul*™ says this: dry and melancholic 
complexions and dry fountains of infirmity and corruption are factors which 
must be seen in order to be conversant with them. By them, one becomes 
similar to a dry animal who remains in hot, dry, mountainous terrain. Such 
places destroy and corrupt whoever comes near them or lingers in them, and 
do so very quickly; and they even destroy and corrupt by their appearance 
those who look at them. According to this, one who looks with malignity in 
his complexion and spirit destroys and corrupts that at which he gazes. 
418 
Plato wrote no book by this title; another medieval apocryphal work is 
meant. 
)15oob 4 C o p t e r 6 
257 
Chapter Six 
How the suffumnigations of the stars ought to be made, and certain 
coompositions necessary to this science 
J ^ I certain sage frcrom the land of India, who was exceptionally well 
I ^ B versed in this: science, combined composite suffumigations and 
^terrestrial nattures v/ith celestial natures. The Hindus used to work 
with suffumigations i in all their workings and effects, and by them they used 
to attract the spirits oaf the planets and make them enter into whatever they 
wished, and by this rmeansmade them accomplish whatever they desired. 
Such workings, howerver, are not properly done by themselves, but they are 
convenient for their ssingular effects in the workings appropriate to each ofthe 
planets, of which we I have ;o often spoken in this book. Accordingly, these 
workings are to be cojmbined with suffumigations. 
Hie Suffumigatiion of Saturn. Take the fruit of mandrake and dried 
olive leaves, 100 ouncces ea:h; grains of black mirobalan and dried black 
pepper, ten ounces eaach; the dried brains of black crows and cranes, 30 
ounces each; dried bldood of pigs and apes, 40 ounces each, all well ground 
and mixed together. fFrom them make pills weighing half an ounce each, and 
while making these, iinvoke the spiritual powers of Saturn, that is, with that 
which we have given i in Bcok III of this volume, chapter 6. Then compress 
them and save them ffor us?. 
The Suffumigatiion of Jupiter. Take flowers of balsam and myrtle, both 
dried, ten ounces eaclh; sheled nuts and shelled hazelnuts, both dried, four 
ounces each; brains olf chiccens, doves, and geese, all dried, 40 ounces each; 
dried blood of peacocks and camels, 20 ounces each; nutmeg and camphor, 
1/2 ounce each, and cdiligeitly see to it that the blood we have mentioned 
in these suffumigatiorns is not extracted from the hearts of the animals. All 
these, having been wesll groind as said above, are mixed together; and do 
everything as we have; said ibove concerning the suffumigation of Saturn. 
The Suffumigatuon ofMars. Take red asafoetida, xenab, and terebinth, 
40 grains each; giant ffenne. and red auripigment, four ounces each; sparrow 
brains and dried scorpions,20 ounces each; 40 ounces of leopard's blood; 
and ten ounces of grerase reidered from a red serpent. All these being well 
ground, mix them together and do everything we have said above with the 
others. 
The Suffumigatuon ofthe Sun. Take ten ounces each of spikenard 
flowers and red and ytellow ;andalwood; six ounces each of cypress, thyme, 
and red cassia wood; ttwo omces of costus; 20 ounces each of eagle brains and 
258 
Kfyt itoatrfr-lliber Kubeuu dftition 
blood, and cat brains and blood. Let them dry, and do everything with them 
that has been set forth above. 
The Suffumigation ofVenus. Take laurel twigs, pomegranate seeds, and 
frankincense seeds, eight ounces each; 20 ounces each of mastic and poley 
stems; four ounces each of henbane stems and storax; two ounces of sodium 
carbonate; 16 ounces each of sparrow brains and goshawk brains, and 40 
ounces of dried horse brains. All these having been well ground, mix them 
together, and do everything with them that has been said before. 
The Suffumigation of Mercury. Tahe 20 ounces each of henbane 
flowers, indigo leaves, and assari; four ounces each of amber and toad testicles; 
two ounces of red ammoniac; 20 ounces each ofthe brains of jays, hoopoes, 
and tortoises; and 40 ounces of donkey's blood. All these, being well dried 
and well ground, should be mixed together; and do with them everything that 
is done with the others. 
The Suffumigation of the Moon. Take 100 ounces each of persimmon 
leaves and cinnamon leaves; 20 ounces of dried orris root and storax; ten 
ounces of cumin; four ounces of fat rendered from a white serpent; 20 ounces 
each ofthe brains of a white rabbit and a black cat, both dried; and 40 
ounces of fox blood. All this, being well ground, should be mixed together, 
and you should do everything that you did with the others. Remember that 
the aforesaid confections of all the planets ought to be mixed with whipped 
honey, and pills made of them, as described for Saturn. 
Whenever you make these, work with the power of the planet for which 
the composition is made, that is, with the spiritual power discussed in chapter 
6 of Book III. Likewise, when making these compositions, continually and 
without ceasing say the words and prayers of that planet. Be careful also that 
no one else sees the suffumigations, and that the suffumigations themselves do 
not behold either the rays ofthe Sun or those ofthe Moon; and keep them in 
a chosen place, and store them in a metal vase, and this vase should be made 
of the metal ofthe planet to which the work pertains. If you do not do what 
is said here, the work will be ruined, and you should know that failure in this 
work occurs because ofthe operator. I will explain the remedy for all of this 
to you, which is that you follow these instructions so that you do not ruin the 
work. 
A sage from the land of the Hindus, however, in a book that he wrote, 
revealed a certain wonder that I wish to repeat to you here; it is among the 
operations of Mercury, and among the profundities and secrets of the spirit 
of that planet, that is, ofthe spirit of knowledge and understanding and 
learning. You should know that this is one ofthe wonders the Hindus have 
in knowledge, secrets, and profundities. 
When certain Hindu sages desire to preach to the people, they used to 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
259 
anoint themselves and their associates with this mixture; and by its virtue, 
spirit would abound in them, and gave them grace and virtue and fortitude 
above all others, so that the people used to obey them. The composition 
was of this kind. Take suet of jays, fat of sea crabs, suet of beef, and dried 
hoopoe blood, 40 ounces each; 20 ounces of amber, ten ounces each of 
dried pomegranate seeds and sydrac seeds, and 50 ounces of costus. All this, 
being well ground, should be mixed together, and as said before, while you 
work upon it, draw down the spirit of Mercury into it, continually repeating 
the prayer of Mercury as we have given it in this book of ours. When you 
have done all this, keep in in a vessel made of fixed mercury; and with this 
composition the sages already mentioned were able to do all that was just 
described by anointing themselves and suffumigating with it. 
These are among the wonders and the secrets of their workings. When 
the sages of the Hindus wished to preach to the common people, they used 
to anoint themselves and their associates with this ointment, that by virtue of 
the ointment the intellectual virtue of the spirit was increased in them, and 
their words were devoutly received by all, and people used to be obedient to 
their sermons. 
This next confection, however, which is for the spirit of Saturn, is made 
in the following way. Take 40 ounces each of pig grease and bear grease, 20 
ounces each of red pepper and lupine seed, ten ounces of myrobalan seed, 
and 30 ounces of dried elephant blood. All this, being well ground, should 
be mixed together, and do everything in the order that we have said above. 
While you are making it, attract the spiritual and celestial virtue to it, that is, 
by saying the prayer of the angel of Saturn as we have given it in this book. 
They thus showed this confection to the spirits so that other people would not 
hear them and so that they would be obedient to the magicians. 
I wish here to teach you a certain thing, without which the work of the 
suffumigations and unguents of the planets is not perfect. In this work, 
't is necessary for you to act so that the attraction ofthe spiritual virtue 
°f ther planet is completed most perfectly; this is kept as a supreme and 
profound secret. When you desire to collect the blood and brains that we 
have mentioned for these suffumigations and ointments, behead the animals 
as has been said above, and make of them a sacrifice, because by sacrifice 
a nd suffumigation the attraction ofthe spirits is more swift. When you wish 
to make such a sacrifice, put the planet whose spirit you desire to attract in 
lts exaltation and free from the infortunes. But you should not permit the 
aforesaid confection to be seen by anybody, and you should keep it in a vessel 
°f lead. 
This next confection protects those who make suffumigations from being 
"armed by the spirits of the planets. The virtue and power of this confection 
26o 
jECfie ^icatriF-Jliber Kiibetw dEtrttion 
extends to all workings involving the planets and speaking with their spirits; 
additionally, it has the greatest virtue against poisons, because it defends 
and protects people so that they are not harmed by the aforesaid. This 
composition is made in the following manner. 
Take six ounces of scorpion brains, four ounces ofthe brain of a white 
dog, eight ounces each of peacock brains and quail brains, four ounces of 
sparrow brains, two ounces of goshawk brains, eight ounces ofthe blood of 
a male hedgehog, and 20 ounces each of donkey brains and hoopoe brains. 
Mix all ofthe aforesaid brains together and allow them to dry. Then grind 
them, and add to them four ounces each of white and yellow sandalwood, 
cinnamon, and spikenard; one ounce of giant fennel; 20 ounces of amber; six 
ounces of ammoniac; ten ounces of frankincense; four ounces of nutmeg; two 
ounces of camphor; 16 ounces of quie (which is a certain kind of gum); and 
four ounces of mandrake. All of this, being well ground, should be mixed 
together, and blend it with oil of centaury. Make seven round pills out ofthe 
confection, and dry them in the shade. 
While you are making this confection ofthe planets, do not cease saying 
their prayers and those of their angels. When you have made the pills as 
we have said, keep them hidden in a vessel made of all seven of the metals 
ofthe seven planets,419 because the spirits ofthe planets remain with them 
continually. Whenever you desire to perform a working of any ofthe seven 
planets, or any other celestial working, keep one of these pills with you while 
you do it, for while you have it with you, the spirits of the planets will not 
be able to harm you. The ancient sages used to protect themselves from the 
aforesaid danger with this mixture, and thence you should know that it is 
most secret and most useful; therefore keep it well and hide it. 
The ointment that follows is found in the books ofthe sages, which 
call it the Ointment of the Sun. The virtue of it is to receive grace, honor, 
exaltation, and love from kings, soldiers and aristocrats. Take one phial of 
glass, and put into it the best oil of roses, pure and clear. On the day of Mars, 
standing upright on your feet, face the Sun, which should be in the signs of 
Aries or Leo and in the degree of the ascendant, with the Moon aspecting 
him with a amicable aspect. Then take the aforesaid phial in your right hand, 
and holding it, with your face to the Sun, say: "May God bless you, planet, 
replete with your light and goodness! How beautiful and good you shine 
forth in your origin and your resplendent spirit! You are indeed the Sun, and 
you rule the cosmos with your light and your spirit and your vigor. You are 
the candle of heaven, you are the light ofthe universe, you are the maker of 
all that is generated, and these powers are infused into you by God. For you 
419 
This is the famous electntm magi cum, an alloy composed of silver, mercury, 
copper, gold, iron, tin, and lead 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
261 
are the Sun, who searches the four corners ofthe cosmos from your turning 
heaven. To you light and beauty are granted by divine power; you grant your 
luminous light or life to the Moon unveiled from her beginning to her end. 
"I ask of you therefore that you grant to me, in this oil, friendship, 
benevolence, and a friendly reception, so that my friendship and the will of all 
hearts shall run together, by which I shall be able to have love and grace from 
kings and greater and lesser persons. Let this be true of me. I ask you and 
conjure you by your dominion that the friendship and love for me in their 
hearts, tongues, and thrones shall be everywhere, and put me in the places 
of their joy, so that my appearance and friendship shall please them in all the 
joys of which they are accustomed to partake, and seeing my presence there 
they shall honor me and be happy. 
"I conjure you, Lord, by the angel Ancora,42" who dwells in the fourth 
heaven, and by Anehutyora, Actarie, Ahudememora, Behartyon, Actarie, 
Ahude,421 that you shall place love and benevolence from the hearts of kings, 
lords, and great persons in this oil which I hold in my hand, that they may 
seek me eagerly, and that I may not have an enemy in the universe, and 
indeed, that all may please me and love me obedient to my will, nor shall they 
transgress against my precepts, but rather seek my grace. 
"I conjure you, Lord, by Behibilyon and Celyuberon,"22 who dwell in the 
fifth heaven, that you will open the hearts of these persons to me and bind 
their tongues so that they are unable to say anything evil of me, nor be able to 
find anything of that kind in words or deeds, and make this binding for now 
and forever. I conjure you, Lord, by Zauceb,423 who is the angel of the sixth 
heaven, that you stop up the mouths of my enemies, or even more, that you 
pour love for me and delight in me into their hearts. 
"I conjure you, Lord, by Barhaot,424 who dwells in the seventh heaven, 
that you grant toward me love, goodwill, a good reputation and a good 
reception in the hearts of the whole universe, and grant to me a good 
reception and perfect love from all people, as well by day as by night, by your 
spirit and grace. I conjure you by the name that gives life to all loves and 
friendships, and that unites and conjoins the hearts of all lovers, that you will 
pour enduring love and benevolence toward me into all their hearts for now 
and forever. Amen." 
Say this prayer twelve times, and observe the foregoing conditions. 
Thereafter keep this oil very carefully. When you wish to enter into the 
420 
[n the Arabic text, this angel is named Anrur. 
421 
In the Arabic text, these names are Jaharrajun, Aqtaraja, A'udajamura. 
422 
In the Arabic text, the first of these angels does not appear, and the second 
•s named Saljubarun. 
423 
In the Arabic text, this name is Susab. 
424 
In the Arabic text, this name appears as Barhawat. 
26Z 
C&e ^atrijc-iliber Kttbeu* dftrttton 
presence of kings, lords, and exalted people, anoint your face with this oil, 
and what you wish, you will attain, and you will see marvels in your friendly 
reception by the aforesaid. This working I found written in the books ofthe 
Hindus, and it is continually in use in all manner of business among them. 
Chapter Seven 
The things of the magical art found in the book The Chaldean 
Agriculture which Abudaer Abemiaxie translated from the 
Chaldean language into Arabic 
3
n the book The Chaldean Agriculture, which Abubaer Abenvaxie 
translated from the Chaldean language into Arabic, we have found 
many workings of the art of magic and a great many other things ofthe 
same kind, which we have written in this place. 
On a certain page of this book, it is recounted that a gardener, while 
he slept one night beneath a laurel tree, heard this laurel speak to him and 
say, "O man, see if in this garden of yours there is a tree that surpasses my 
beauty and virtue; for indeed you will find no one who can say that he has 
found a tree better, lovelier, more honorable, and more precious than I am." 
To this the gardener responded, "Why do you say this, and what signifies 
this saying to me?" The tree said, "That you will recognize me as such I 
speak to you, and that you will honor me above other trees. Know that I am 
honored and prized by Jupiter, who delights in me and honors me. Therefore 
I speak to you, that you will honor me above other trees, and worship me 
at opportune times, for I will reveal to you a marvelous working suitable to 
others (and most useful to those who may come after you). Therefore rise up 
in the middle ofthe night and put oil of laurel seeds'^ on your hands, and 
you should also anoint your face with it. Then stand, raising your face to 
look toward the heaven of Jupiter, and say: 'O Jupiter, who is the fortune of 
fortunes! I ask you by the praise and honor that this laurel tree offers to you 
that you will grant me fifteen more years of life after this day.' When you have 
done this, until the aforesaid time you will remain safely alive. Truly I say to 
you that if you do this working, you will find it to be true, nor will it fail you, 
and in this way you may help yourself. By this working you will be able to 
know the honor and love that I have from Jupiter, and how much he delights 
in me and permits me." 
425 
Or oil of acorns; the Latin is ambiguous. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 265 
In the aforementioned book, in discussing the properties of this tree, it 
also says this: Adam the prophet said that if you take fourteen seeds of the 
laurel tree, and grind them to a powder when they are perfectly dry, and pu1 
the powder in a very clean dish with wine vinegar and beat it with a stick of 
fig wood—when you wish someone to be possessed by a demon, give thai 
person some of this powder in a drink. He will appear to be greatly vexed by 
a demon, but no one else will be able to perceive it. The cure: give him thfee 
ordinary radishes with all their leaves, and make sure none of them are left 
uneaten; when they reach his stomach and remain there for a little while, 
will be cured ofthe foregoing. 
It is proven above in the same place, concerning the laurel tree, that if/°Ui 
take the leaves ofthe laurel and raise them in your hands after touching the111 
to the ground, then put them over your ears—while they remain there, yon 
will not become drunk, nor will you have a headache, no matter how much 
unmixed wine you drink. 
Of this tree, in the same book, it says: Take laurel leaves and lime or 
vitriol426, one pound each; let them be pulverized together and mixed with 
strong vinegar. If you anoint your hands with this, you will be able to take 
red hot iron in your hands because ofthe ointment, without suffering any 
harm. 
Again in the same book it says: if you take boughs from the ash tree an^ 
cook with its leaves, all the insects that are in that place will gather around. 
Abenvasia also recounts that the sages of magic have said that the sap 
of trees, their fat, and their oil—all the aforesaid exist in every kind of tree, 
and if one works with these words and ceremonies, they quickly received 
the virtue of spirit and of the ceremony. Sap indeed is more disposed than 
the others to receive this; for this reason those who work with tree sap usin£ 
words and ceremonies, and changing the words, put anything in a drink, 
destroy and damage the hearts and bodies of the sages. 
A certain sage, however, has said that myrtle has a power in magical 
ceremonies worthy of praise when it is mixed with other things. The 
Chaldean sages assert that those who work with this tree fashion figures of 
diverse animals out of its roots in the place where it grows, asserting that 
these are no small foundation for magical ceremonies, because from them a 
man who looks on them may be made in effect and spirit to have their proper 
form, figured and posed in their similitude. Again they say that they take 
the roots of this tree at someone's birth, and make from them the figure of a 
t^an or a woman, writing on it the name of the person of whom the image 
's constructed. From the roots they make other figures—that is, of lions, 
Serpents, scorpions, and every other kind of noxious animal—mixed with 
426 
Lime is calcium carbonate, CaCO (, and vitriol is copper sulphate, CuS0 4 • 
2<*4 
Efye i^icatriF-JLfiber Hubeutf CDttfon 
the other forms aforementioned and placed upon them, and that they do the 
aforesaid at a specific and opportune time, when the planets and fixed stars 
are properly positioned to accomplish the foregoing. Those for whom they 
do these workings in that place become ill and are seen to be cruelly afflicted 
by some demon, losing their senses and suffering many other infirmities. 
In that same book of The Chaldean Agriculture it is recounted that this 
tree praises itself above other trees, saying: "I am the tree of gold, and my 
color is like unto it; and by me people are liberated from 98 illnesses, and are 
cured. My oil fortifies the heart and cleans the gums, and by it the spirit is 
made glad, and there is no other oil that does this better than mine. I am the 
blessed tree. Whoever takes my branches or leaves or fruit and places them in 
his house will not suffer from wretched miseries or from sad thoughts, and for 
all the circle of that year in all his relationships he will live fearless and alert. 
I am indeed above all others the blessed tree; for whoever watches the Sun 
rise in the morning, carrying me with him in his hands, will rejoice and be 
glad that day. For I am the tree of Saturn, weightiest of planets; I am the tree 
of the greater name and great Saturn; I am the tree that makes the sorrowful 
rejoice; I am the tree that removes misfortune from the unfortunate; I am 
the tree that populates desert places, and by me the regions of Persia and the 
land ofthe black people are made fertile. I have the first among days, and the 
highest and most honored among planets, and the oldest among cities, and 
the strongest and most durable among castles, and the greatest and longest 
among rivers, and the coldest among winds, and the clearest among parts, 
and the highest among heavens, and the oldest among trees, and I obtain the 
noblest among qualities and the highest among relics." 
Concerning this, however, a certain sage named Zeherith, who was one 
of the three who composed the book of The Chaldean Agriculture, said this: 
If anyone on the first day ofthe lunar month, and the first hour thereof, 
takes olive branches with green leaves and no yellow leaves, and carries them 
to his house, and keeps them until the beginning ofthe next moon; at the 
beginning ofthe next moon, as before, let him again take branches to his 
house, carrying them as before, which he should keep in the place where the 
first branches were. Then let him take the first and burn them until they 
are blackened by the heat, and he will be protected from all the evils and 
impediments of Saturn, and will be wholly free of them, and will be alert 
and joyful in his spirit and qualities, and will in no way grieve or suffer, and 
will profit by his work, and live a fortunate life, and will be virtuous, nor will 
he die except of old age. Again, he says that if anyone mixes the aforesaid 
olive branches with palm branches in order to work as we have said above, 
all who dwell in his house will be healthy until they die, and from them all 
cold illnesses will depart, and the light and sight of their eyes will be increased 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
267 
every day if they look at the aforementioned branches. 
Whoever takes a fresh olive pit and cleans it of all outward dirt, perforates 
it, threads it on a strong black silken thread, and suspends it from that thread 
around the neck of any animal, that animal will not be afraid to wander alone 
at night, and will be alert, and will be made docile toward people. If any 
person is timid, and carries the aforesaid around his neck, fear will depart 
from him; if he is weeping, his tears will be taken away and he will receive 
good solace; and if he suffers from evil thoughts, they will flee away from him 
and good thoughts about all things will replace them. 
If anyone takes nine ofthe aforesaid pits and cleans them of all external 
moisture and oil, and holding them in his hand, let him watch the Sun when 
he rises in the morning, and one after another holds them up as though to 
throw them in the Sun's face, and while doing this says: "O you Sun! Have 
mercy on me, and free me from the infirmities that I suffer." Let him do this 
seven times, with 49 of the aforesaid seeds,42" and he will be cured wholly of 
his infirmity, even if that infirmity has lasted a long time. 
If you wish that an angry person be freed from the anger he has toward 
you, take seventeen ofthe aforesaid pits, well cleaned, and wash them well in 
hot water and, after a little while, in cold water, and dry them very well with 
a clean and attractive cloth, and then anoint them with olive oil. Then put 
them in your left hand. Stand above a flowing river, looking at the water, 
and say: "O you running water, who is the contrary of burning fire! Appease 
such a person's anger toward me, and remove from him the ill will he has 
toward me; let him be so pacified toward me that he may wholly cherish me 
and love me." When you have done this, throw one of the aforementioned 
seeds into the middle of the flowing water; and say these words seventeen 
times in turn, and each time throw one ofthe aforesaid pits. When you have 
completed this, the anger of the one who bears it toward you will depart from 
him; even if it is the anger of a great king or some other great lord, he will be 
pacified and delight in you and receive you honorably. 
If anyone takes a vessel of crystal or clear white glass, and filling it with 
good clear olive oil, places it before the Sun every morning and, on an empty 
stomach, continually observes its shadow and gazes into the oil, his vision will 
he invigorated and all infirmities will depart from his vision and eyes, and 
his heart and will will rejoice, and he will be loved and very well received by 
everyone who sees him. 
If anyone plants flowering mallow, and continually surrounds himself 
with the same, and looks at its flowers, sadness and ill will and evil thoughts 
will be cast out of his heart, and he will be very well received. 
427 
There has been a scribal error here, as seven times nine does not equal 49. 
'» all probability, the ceremony originally involved seven olive pits rather than nine. 
266 
jEEfce ^attv-iUber Hubeiw dftrttion 
If you wish that a spring of running water, the flow of which has 
diminished, will recover the same, do the following. Have a virgin girl, 
young and beautiful, go to the spring carrying a drum, and standing over 
the outflow of water, let her begin to beat the drum softly, and let her go 
on beating it for three hours. At the beginning of the fourth hour, another 
lovely and beautiful virgin should go to the same place, bringing with her a 
tambourine, which she should start beating, following the same beat as the 
drum. They should do this for the space of six hours; nine hours will pass in 
all, at the end of which the water of the spring will increase. Do all this in a 
single day, or at most in three days, and that spring will be made fit for use. 
Again it says: Lovely virgin girls dressed in garments of diverse colors 
and carrying diverse instruments (whatever instruments they wish) before the 
opening of the spring go singing and drumming. Then they go around the 
opening ofthe spring at a distance of two cubits doing the same. Then over a 
distance of 21 cubits, one after another, they approach it drumming and draw 
back from it singing. They then return to circling the opening ofthe spring 
as before. Then they work by drawing back from, and then approaching the 
spring, that is, drumming and singing as has been said. When all this has 
been completed, the water of that spring will be increased that day or the 
next. 
If anyone takes mallow leaves well ground and mixed with olive oil, and 
anoints his hands and body with it, if he puts his hands among bees or wasps, 
they will not sting him or harm him, nor will they do him any hurt. 
If you wish to exterminate fleas, take white lead, quicklime, and the roots 
of bitter melon, grind them well and add an equal amount of asafoetida; all 
this should be tempered with water, and an equal amount of salt mixed with 
it. If you sprinkle this mixture in your home, all the fleas that dwell there will 
perish. 
For improving vines. Take chickpeas and anoint them with olive oil, 
cook them, then grind them very well, and cast around a pound thereof about 
a vine when the fruit is becoming sour, and the sour taste will naturally depart 
from the vine. 
For removing sorrow. Take chickpeas which you have set in the light 
ofthe Moon at night, when her light is increasing; in the morning, before 
the sun rises, anoint them with olive oil, and put them in water to soften 
them for the space of two hours. Then cook them. From all those to whom 
you give these to eat, all sorrow, ill will, evil thoughts, and every kind of 
melancholy will depart, and their hearts will rejoice in the highest virtue, and 
they will become joyful and alert in all things. 
When clouds appear that look as though they carry hail, and someone 
wishes to protect his harvest from hailstorms, let him have many associates 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 7 
with him, of which some should carry silk, and some should have nothing 
in their hands, and let them go out into his field; and one by one let them 
throw the silk at the clouds, while the others who are without silk go about 
clapping their hands. All of them should make high-pitched cries, ofthe sort 
that farmers make when they want to make birds and noxious animals flee; 
they should do this very often. Remember, however, that there ought to be 
an even number of them, and the more there are, the better. This has been 
proven and found true by very many. 
Take pure steel (that is, iron from Andanica428) and make of it a highly 
polished mirror. Go toward the clouds, carrying the mirror in your hands 
and raising it toward the clouds, shouting in a loud voice, and the tempests 
will depart from that place. 
In a certain book edited by Geber the sage, concerning tempests and 
other things, I found this written. Make a mirror of gold or gilt silver, and 
suffumigate it with hair from a woman's chest, which you moisten with 
your semen, then suffumigate it with threads from her garment. After you 
have washed yourself, look into it, and you will make her image appear in 
the mirror, followed immediately by yours; or first yours, then hers. This 
experiment is something that Ptolemy of Babylon said, and three sages from 
India found it in Egypt; and they proved that this mirror ought to be made 
when the Moon is in conjunction with Jupiter, and gilded or furbished when 
the Moon is with Venus. 
But I wish to tell you the composition ofthe mirror, and how it is to be 
worked and kept, for this reason, that all the nature of humanity enters into 
it. Temper the mirror with live and natural blood; then suffumigate it; then 
write on it the names ofthe seven stars, their seven symbols, and the names of 
the seven angels and seven winds. Now the names of the seven stars are these: 
Zohal, Musteri, Marrech, Xemz, Zohara, Hotarid, Alchamar. And these 
figures are written in a circle around the outer edge, 
and they are in a ring. Next are written within a polished and gilded circle 
the names of these seven angels: Captiel, Satquiel, Samael, Raphael, Anael, 
Michael, Gabriel. When this is done, the names ofthe seven winds are 
written on the unpolished part, and these are the powers of the wind, of 
whom the names are these: Barchia, Bethel almoda, Hamar benabis, Zobaa 
marrach, Fide arrach, Samores maymon, Aczabi. 
428 
Andanica: an old Greek town in Italy, now Andorossa. 
2tS8 
C& c ^icattrijr-ILlber Hubeti* Coition 
Then suspend the mirror for seven days in silk above water, and 
suffumigate it; and let it be suspended from a red staff. For three nights 
suffumigate it with good odors; the best may be found in the Book of 
Moses. If you gaze into this mirror, and keep it well, you will see that in it 
you will gather men, winds, spirits, demons, the dead and the living, and all 
will obey you and be at your command. Do your work in this manner: the 
suffumigation is of the seven things proper to man, that is, blood, semen, 
spittle, ear wax, the tears ofthe eyes, feces, and urine. Suffumigate with this, 
and instruct the winds as you wish; and they will do your will. Keep this, and 
you will experience all that I have said to you; for you will have power over 
winds, men, and demons, and they will come obediently to you. Do this over 
a basin of water or over some other clean vessel full of water. And you will 
behold this, and it will be fulfilled as you have asked. 
The sage whom we have already named (that is, Zeherith) has recounted 
nineteen experiments which are written below. The first is to protect 
vineyards from bad weather. Take a tablet of marble or wood, and on it make 
images of vines and grapes—do this between the 22nd day of October and 
the fourth day of December (that is, on whatever day among the aforesaid 
you wish); and put the tablet thus made in the middle ofthe vineyard. This 
image is proven to protect vineyards from the weather. 
For chasing noxious animals from a vineyard. Take equal parts of the 
feces of a black dog and the feces of a wolf. Let them be mixed with human 
urine, and leave them thus for seven days; at the end of which, sprinkle this 
wherever you wish in the vineyard. No noxious animal, such as bears, wolves, 
foxes, serpents, and the like, will enter into that place. Do the aforesaid for 
three days in succession. 
For making serpents flee. Take tartago wood and suffumigate with it in 
a place where serpents gather together, and at once they will flee from there. 
For the same. Take ammoniac and asafoetida, one ounce each, and 
strong wine vinegar that has been boiled on the fire, and while boiling it 
dissolve the aforesaid gums until they are well mixed. Then let it be taken 
out and formed into lozenges, which you should save for use in a glass vessel. 
When you wish serpents to flee from anywhere they are, suffumigate that 
place that you wish to purify with the said lozenges, or others of the same 
sort, and you will have your intention. 
For making reptiles and mice flee. Take xenab, deer's horn, axenus 
and leopard's tongue. Let them all be pulverized and mixed with very strong 
wine vinegar; let them be tempered and cooked together until the result is 
the consistency of oxymel.4'9 Then mix it with powdered pomegranate leaves. 
Make pills out of this, and save them for use in a glass vessel. When you do 
429 
Oxymel: a mixture of"honey and vinegar much used in medieval medicine. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
269 
the working, suffumigate the place with these, and it will be purified of them. 
For killing mice. Take equal parts of litharge'"" and ceruse,1"1 and 
pulverize them. Add to one part of this mixture, four parts of flour, and mix 
it all with a little oil. Make it into pills, and anoint them with aged cheese 
several years old that has a good odor. Put these in a place where mice are 
accustomed to go; all those that eat of the pills will quickly die. 
For the same. Take a bronze vessel, and put into it the dregs of oil in 
which black hellebore has been mixed. Put this same vessel in the house 
where mice are accustomed to go. The odor ofthe oil will draw them to it; 
and when they have taken a little ofthe oil, they will suddenly fall over as 
though drunk. 
For killing scorpions. Take radish leaves and put them on scorpions, 
and they will bite themselves until they die. 
To make a lover forget his beloved. Take fava beans when the Moon 
is in either of Saturn's rulerships, and put them in wine for a day and a night 
to soften them; then let them be cooked in the same wine. When they are 
cooked, let them be given to the lover to eat, and he will forget his beloved. 
That wasps and bees do not sting you. Take dry powdered asparagus 
roots, and mix them with sesame oil. Anoint your hands and feet with this; 
afterwards, you will be able to safely enter the place because you will be able 
to remain safe from injury from them. 
A deadly poison. Take the juice of an herb that is known in the land 
of Armenia, the leaves of which are similar to palm leaves except that they 
are finer, and with it anoint the point of a spear or any other weapon, and if 
anyone is wounded by being struck with it, in tha day or the one following it, 
he shall die. To cure this, take human feces, fresh or dried. If you get it fresh, 
give the patient two ounces of it in a drink with oil of roses, or oil of violets, 
or the two mixed together; by this potion alone he will be able to escape from 
it. If you get the feces dried, give him four ounces in a drink with the same 
amount of dried roses. As I recollect, I believe that this herb is called alcondiz, 
because from the juice of that herb a deadly poison is made when iron is 
dipped into it, and afterwards blood is shed in wounding someone with the 
iron. 
Another deadly poison. If anyone consumes a pound of monkshood 
seeds, he will die within four hours despite any remedy given afterwards 
except fresh human feces given in a drink. You should know that human 
feces, fresh or dried, generally counter every poison,except the bite ofthe 
430 
Litharge: lead monoxide, PbO. 
431 
Ceruse: 
l e a d carbonate, PbCO,. Both this and litharge are highly toxic. 
432 
It seems almost superfluous to remind the reader that the rest of this 
paragraph is not good advice to follow! 
2 70 
JEtje ^catriF-Jllber Kubeu* tuition 
deaf adder, which are not healed by them alone. It is very necessary that a 
plaster of radishes, well crushed, be put on bites of this snake, and the pain 
will be soothed. 
A theriac for every poison. Take three ounces of laurel wood, seven 
ounces of its leaves, and two ounces of its fruit. Let this be dried and well 
powdered, and to it add six ounces of human feces. Mix it together and 
incorporate it with honey and wax, and be sure that the weight ofthe latter is 
no greater than the former. Keep this confection in a golden or silver vessel. 
This is a universal theriac against every poison, and it prevents graying ofthe 
hair. 
If you put a laurel bough in a house where a frightened infant is being 
nursed, putting the bough above its cradle, the infant will be freed from 
fear. If you plant a laurel tree inside a house wherever you wish, fear will be 
removed from the house, and its inhabitants will be happy, joyful, and rest 
well, which are properties ofthe aforesaid tree. 
The seeds of the darnel damage the head and make the eyes darken and 
remove vision and cause sleep. Some accursed people take equal parts of 
darnel seeds, crocus, olibanum, and wine lees, and if anyone drinks of this 
confection, he will sleep, and his tongue will become so dry that he will not 
be able to speak, nor will he be able to stand up. If you add to these things 
four other things, which are these: mandrake, wild lettuce seed, black pepper, 
and henbane seed, if you give this confection to anyone, he will be drunk 
and will lose his senses and will be completely out of his mind. Abenvasia, 
speaking ofthe foregoing, instructs that this confection should be kept secret, 
nor should it be revealed to any wicked person. 
In The Chaldean Agriculture, speaking of this same herb,433 he says that 
in it exist many marvelous properties—that is, if you put a handful of it into 
a basin and put snakes in it, they will rise up on their tails as though they 
wished to jump; and that if you put this herb next to a mirror placed so as to 
stand in the sun, it will be burnt. 
For healing morphews. When the Sun sets and you are about to go to 
sleep, take as many fava beans as you can hold in your hand and say: "You, 
Sun, precious and high lord, I ask that you take away this morphew from me, 
and make it vanish from my body and my chest and from whatever place it 
may be." When you have said this, throw one of the aforesaid beans behind 
your shoulder; and repeat the foregoing words and do the said action until all 
the beans are gone. Do the foregoing seven nights in a row, and do this when 
the Moon is waning. 
For catching birds. Take fava beans and darnel seed, and put them in 
wind to moisten for a day and a night; then take it and put it in a place where 
433 
That is, darnel. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
271 
cranes, crows, and other birds are able to eat from it. Those who eat of it will 
fall to the ground as though dead. 
For taking away warts. First count how many there are, and take the 
same number of chickpeas. When the Moon is conjunct the Sun according 
to its proper motion, you should warm the aforesaid chickpeas somewhat 
at the fire. Then upon each one of the warts put one of the chickpeas, and 
leave it there for a little while; then take it off the same, and let it be put in 
a black cloth and tied up with a thread. Stand upon a high place, throw the 
chickpeas behind you, and return to your home without any backward glance 
or step toward the chickpeas. 
For separating two people from each other. The seeds of a certain tree 
that is called sebestan have many properties in workings of magic, among 
which there is a working for separating two people from each other and 
putting discord and even enmity between them; for indeed the property of 
these seeds is to separate friendships and altering the will in such a way as to 
make it bear ill will toward others. The words of Zeherith the sage extend this 
far. 
Abenvasia recounts that all the Chaldeans, great as well as small, men and 
women alike, on the first night of the month of March used to put in their 
beds under their heads one piece of cheese and four dates and seven grape 
seeds and an equal number of grains of salt, in a fitting cloth. They used to 
say that a certain old woman who was a servant ofVenus used to say tha on 
that night everyone in their beds ought to feel under their bellies and look 
beneath their heads. If they found emptiness under their bellies and did not 
find it under their heads (because ofthe portion of cheese, dates, and raisins, 
as said above), they used to pray to Venus at once that a certain man who 
had been sick all that year, and had been hindered in all his works, would 
be sustained for the following year. All the Babylonians also used to do this 
without fail. 
He also said that the power of Saturn and Mars was combined in a 
certain fruit similar to a melon, which is called "batecas;" and it is used by 
those who perform astrological operations. Again he says: if anyone puts the 
seeds ofthe batecas in a human skull, and buries it, and covers it well with 
earth, and waters it, from it will grow citrulls.4M Whoever eats these citrulls 
will experience an increase in vigor, memory, and intellect. If you put these 
seeds in the skull of a donkey and bury it, and keep them moist with water as 
above, it will bear citrulls, and anyone who eats of them will become silly and 
foolish, and his vigor, courage and intellect will depart from him. 
In the same book it says that the Chaldeans use the roots of this herb in 
one way, its leaves in another, its stems in still another, and its seeds similarly 
434 
The fruit of a relative of the cucumber. 
272 
C&e Picatrtriltter ttubeiw dftrttfon 
in another, and in each of them are marvelous and beautiful effects in the 
art of magic. This happens because it swiftly attracts and readily received 
all those things that Nature herself has placed in it. When it is mixed with 
human brains, those who eat of it will accomplish wonders. 
It says later in the same book that if the same seed is placed in the head 
and belly of any animal, and the seed and the animal buried together in the 
earth, it will bear citrulls that will work marvels, and they will be similar in 
their effects to the animal in whose head or belly the aforementioned seed was 
placed, as described above. Whoever eats of them and mixes them with his 
own nature—they will work wonders in the body of those who eat them. 
Again in the same book it says that if someone takes one mandrake root 
and buries it in the same place as these batecas seeds, they will work many 
wonders, which I omit at present because of the tedium of writing so long a 
passage; in that book, however, it is contained in full. 
A certain ancient sage who was ahead of his time in philosophy recounted 
twelve miraculous workings, which I intend to write down at this point. The 
first is that, if anyone puts a human skull in a seed bed, and in that place the 
seed of batecas has been planted and covered with earth, and this seed is cast 
into soil prepared for it, and thereafter each day it is watewred with a mixture 
of lukewarm water and human blood, it will once again bear citrulls. Those 
who eat them will see many terrifying as well as other marvelous things. 
Again it says: if someone takes in his hand the root of an onion, 
watching the Moon at night when she rises in the first hour of the night, 
and stands on his feet facing the Moon, saying the words and prayers we 
have given in this book, and offering the following conjuration: "I swear by 
you, Moon, that if you take from me pain and infirmities ofthe teeth, that 
I will never eat any part of an onion;" then let him cook the onion he has 
in his hands, and eat it. Whoever does this every month when the Moon is 
disposed as aforesaid will be protected against all infirmities of the teeth. 
That a chicken will follow you around. Take the leaves of a garden 
onion, and fold them up one inside another. Give them to whatever chicken 
you wish for three days in a row—that is, three times a day; and you ought to 
begin this working on a Wednesday. Thereafter the chicken will esteem you 
and follow you. 
Hiat every hard body be softened. Take sal alkali'"5 and galbanum, 
ten pounds each. Put them in a vessel with three times as much water as 
both together, and let it remain there for seven days, at the end of which you 
should strain the water through a cloth. Then heat the water, and put into it 
the same amount of alkali and galbanum as before. Again, let it remain there 
for seven days, and then strain through cloth. Then reheat the water, and into 
435 
Sal alkali: impure potassium carbonate, K,CO, 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
275 
each ten pounds of water put half a pound of ammoniac and two ounces of 
atrament. Let all this be put on a gentle fire or warmed well by the Sun; leave 
it for ten days, and then let it be cooked for one entire day; then strain it, and 
it is made. If you put bone, horn, stones, or any hard metallic body into it, 
and allow it again to be heated by the Sun, while covered entirely with sheets 
of lead, what you put into it will be softened to the consistency of paste. 
For the same. Take cedar tips and mix them with red wine vinegar, and 
mix them very well, until they are blended together. Into each pound of the 
same put three ounces each of sal ammoniac and powdered sea salt; let them 
be mixed well, and leave them in the sun for three days, stirring each day. 
When you have done the foregoing in this way, put into it any hard body you 
wish, and it will be made so soft that you will be able to work it as you wish. 
For the same. The sage mentioned above said that sulfur softens every 
metallic body, and its work with every stone and metal is marvelous. 
For provoking uncontrollable laughter. Give ten ounces of powdered 
crocus in a drink to anyone you wish; it will cause him to start laughing 
uncontrollably, until finally he dies. 
The herb ofthe lion destroys all trees and plants that are around it, nor 
can any tree or any other plant grow in a place where herb ofthe lion grows. 
It can only be uprooted in this way. Let a virgin girl approach it, carrying a 
white rooster with a divided crest; and circling the place where the plant is, let 
her make the rooster strike the plant with its wings. By that striking the herb 
will be dried up.'"6 
If a cat approaches any place where spikenard is, and it smells the odor 
ofthe spikenard, it will not leave that place, but will seek for the spikenard 
and cry as loudly as it can—this is one of the marvels of plants and the places 
where they appear. 
Every place has different properties, that is, there are trees and animals 
attributed to it that are rarely found elsewhere, as seen with balsam, which is 
said to grow in Egypt alone, and ebanus which grows on the island of Huac 
and not elsewhere, and the tree that is called "the tree ofthe black people" 
and only grows in the country of the black people, and the tree bearing 
olibanum, which is found in the plain of Hamen, and the muse tree which is 
only known in the western lands, and many others which are in some places 
and not in others, that is, according to whether or not the place is appropriate 
to them. The property of lands and places are from the harmony of waters 
and airs; but the first causes of all these is in the line of heaven transiting over 
that place and from the vigor ofthe stars found therein. For from the vigor 
and nature of the stars existing in that line will be the production of animals 
436 
That is, its poisonous quality—dangerous to humans as well as other 
plants—will be dried up. 
Kty ^catriF-Jliber Kubeiw dEUitlon 
and trees in that place, which are not able to be produced in other places. 
In the western seas there is a certain island named Cadiz, in which a 
certain herb grows in the springtime; and the cattle of that island eat that 
herb. If anyone drinks milk from that herd, he will become drunk as though 
it were wine; and he will be made as merry by that milk as by wine. 
In France a certain tree is said to grow, and if anyone stays under it 
for the space of half an hour, he will die; and if anyone touches it or takes 
anything from it, he will die instantly.4'" 
Likewise in France, in the southern part, a certain small tree is said to 
grow, and it is the size of a cabbage, but its leaves are like those of rue. 
If 
anyone takes the root with the branches and leaves of this same tree, and puts 
them in cold water and leaves them for an hour, the water will become as hot 
as if it stood by the fire; and when it is taken out, at once the water will be as 
cold as before. 
In the land of India there is said to be a certain tree which cannot be 
burned by fire. There is said to be another tree there which, if you take a 
branch and put it on the ground, if will move like a serpent. 
In the same place is said to be another tree from which, in spring and fall, 
voices similar to human voices are heard to issue, and the roots of that tree are 
shaped like human beings. 
In the land of Bequien is a certain tree that lights up at night like a 
candle. 
It says also that costus, which is found in the land of India, emits more 
odor than any other thing, and it is the suffumigation they use for images 
in the houses of their ceremonies. The Chaldeans say that it is the best of 
all things for making offerings and suffumigations to images ofVenus, and 
many work with her images using it. Zeherith the sage included this tree in 
the book The Chaldean Agriculture. He said that some of the Chaldeans used 
to mix nutmeg, holly, moist and dry storax, rose and myrtle flowers, as well 
as frankincense, with this herb; and all of them mixed it with crocus. With 
this mixture they used to suffumigate their clothing, images, and faces on 
their high holy days,4'" saying that the odor of this suffumigation destroys all 
infirmities and turns impediments away from them. 
It says further that a suffumigation of the myrrh tree or its branches 
prevents epidemics. Again, they used to make a suffumigation ofthe wood of 
the same tree, as well as its gum, to which they used to add incense, nutmeg, 
437 
This is the famous Upas tree. According to some medieval writers, it was so 
deadly that if the shadow of a flying bird touched it, the bird would drop dead from 
the air. In medieval European writings, the Upas tree was believed to be somewhere 
in the mysterious East; it is rather charming to find it claimed here as a tree ofthe 
distant and exotic land of France. 
438 
High holy days: literally in suispascalibus diebus, "on their Easter days." 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
275 
holly, and storax, saying that this suffumigation made Venus gracious. When 
they used to burn this suffumigation with sacrifices to Venus, and with her 
prayers and conjurations before her book and images as we have said in 
this book, playing their instruments and saying the aforesaid conjurations 
ofVenus, they would ask from Venus whatever they wished. When this 
ceremony was given to Venus she would fulfill all their petitions. They 
did not do the foregoing unless Venus was free of all other planets and in 
her power and virtue, so that she was not iunedited43'' by anything, and 
especially by an aspect or conjunction with Mercury, because among the 
other impediments to Venusan aspect or conjunction with Mercury takes the 
highest place. Zeherith the Sage said that the addition of crocus and costus to 
the foregoing suffumigation adds power to it, and the work will be completed 
more quickly. 
We have related all these marvels of trees in this our book because plants 
are one part ofthe inferior world of the elements, subject to generation and 
corruption. Generation and corruption, in turn, are divided into three parts, 
that is, in animals, in plants, and in minerals. Plants are the medium between 
animals and minerals because plants correspond to animals in living, growing, 
and reproducing, and to minerals in corporeity and insensitivity. Thus plants 
are more useful to human life than animals or minerals. Those things that 
are useful to human life and health from plants are seeds, roots, stalks, bark, 
leaves, flowers, and fruit; from minerals, human beings also take what is 
useful to them such as salt, alum, stones, and metals; from animals, meat, fat, 
bones, blood, and other components of animal bodies are used. 
It is therefore manifest that plants are situated closer to humanity than 
are minerals, and among plants are trees, which exceed the other plants in 
goodness, scent, properties, usefulness, or some other thing. It is clearly 
similar in minerals, that is, in precious stones, which are considered more 
excellent than other stones, and likewise among metals, among which gold 
prevails over all. But the noblest and most precious of all corruptible things 
is the rational animal, that is, man, to whose perception and industry all 
things are made subject until the end. This elementary world exists because 
ofthe elements; the elements because of nature; nature because of spirit; spirit 
because of intellect; and intellect becasue of God Himself, upon whom all the 
heavens and nature depend. To Whom be blessings for the infinite ages of 
ages. Amen. 
439 
Impedited: in astrological terminology, a planet that is impedited is subject 
t 0 a negative influence from other planets, or is in debility due to its place in the signs 
and houses of the astrological chart. 
2 76 
C&e ^icatn^iLtber Uubeu£f Gftutlon 
Chapter Eight 
The virtues of other things which Nature does by her own properties 
^ ^ / n this part we will recount the marvelous properties of simples, trees, 
A animals, and minerals. First is the emerald; when it is seen by the 
_ J k i n d of viper that has a head resembling a weasel's, the viper's eyes 
suddenly go blind. Further, when serpents' eyes are hurt, they rest their gaze 
upon fennel, and at once they are healed. Eagles carry a diamond to the 
place where they raise their young, so that the chicks will be protected from 
serpents. When bears see the eyes of mice, at once they flee from them. 
When the bones of a hoopoe are put in hot water, the parts from the 
bottom ofthe bird sink, while the others float on top ofthe water. 
When an owl dies, one of its eyes stays open and the other closes. If 
the closed eye is placed over someone, he will sleep and cannot be awakened 
while it remains over him, while if the open one is placed above someone, he 
cannot sleep unless it is taken away. If someone who suffers from gout places 
the claw of a vulture above himself, he will be freed from the gout—that is, 
in this way: if the gout is on the right side, he puts the right claw of a vulture 
over himself, and likewise for the left. 
In the land of Horazen is said to be a very white stone named assiffe that 
cannot be ground down. When this stone is put on anyone's stomach, it 
heals whatever infirmities ofthe stomach might be present. 
In the river Algeriche are found white, spotted, black, and mixed stones, 
and if they are rubbed together, they provoke a flood in that river which will 
not cease while the stones are being rubbed. For this reason no one is able 
to enter the river or walk on its gravel at night because ofthe rubbing ofthe 
stones; from that friction, floods issue as said above, and at night we cannot 
perceive them by sight. 
The eagle-stone sounds inwardly as though it had another stone inside 
it, but when it is broken, nothing is found, and each ofthe parts sounds as 
above. This stone is red in color like the soil of Cabros. The virtue of it is 
wonderful in childbirth; for if a woman giving birth takes it, she gives birth at 
once without danger and with little pain. 
There is a certain animal the size of a fox, and similar to a cat in form 
and appearance. This animal puts out fire by its coldness, nor is it killed or 
burned by fire. The mouths of ostriches are not burned by fire, nor is its 
stomach, into which hot iron may be put; for it digests iron in its stomach 
and takes no harm from it, and indeed is nourished by it. If you take all the 
feathers from whatever bird you wish, and make of them a single mass, if you 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 279 
rub that mass over a cloth or your hand, whatever body of modest size you 
touch with it will be drawn to it and suspended above the ground. 
There is said to be a certain stone named behet, which is of a color like 
the color of marcasite,4,11 and it shines beautifully. Anyone who looks at it 
even once will remain in continual laughter until he dies, nor is there said to 
be any remedy that will cure such laughter. On this stone there is said to be 
a certain bird named alphersit. It is the size of a sparrow, and is black, but its 
neck and legs are red. When this bird rises from the stone, the stone loses its 
virtue, and if, after this, someone sees it, he will not be harmed by it. 
The fava bush has thick stalks, and when they are broken, the beans 
become hard. If you put this stalk on a person possessed by a demon, he will 
be freed from the demon; by the odor ofthe stalk, the demon will depart 
from him. 
If you burn deer horn before serpents, they will die of the odor. Ants 
are killed by the odor of cumin. Scorpions will flee from the odor of crocus, 
nor are they able to remain in a place where it is. Flees avoid the odor of 
chalk, and if you put hot salt in your house, they will flee from it. If you 
suffumigate with poley, insects will flee at once. 
In pools of water there is said to be an algae that cannot be burned with 
fire. This herb is similar to a green plant, but is not one. It is named pond 
lentil. Stems of jujube make neither light nor flame when they are burned. 
The vulture carries the leaves of alexinz to the place where its chicks are, 
so that they may be protected from harmful animals. 
The stone atarac is among the things that are inseparable, and is a stone 
that cannot be broken in any way; both large and small stones of this kind 
exist. If you put little pieces of a certain stone called algemest442 in a bottle of 
wine, no one who drinks from that bottle will become drunk at all, nor will 
the wine harm him. If you put small pieces of another stone called atambari 
into a vessel, however, and any kind of drink is put in that vessel, whoever 
drinks of it will become drunk, will lose their senses and intellect, and 
become worried and sad. 
The lodestone attracts iron. If you anoint it with an onion, it loses its 
virtue; if you then put it in sheep's blood, it regains its virtue. 
In the river of Cerich is said to be a certain kind of serpent. If any man 
sees one of them, the man will die; while if the serpent sees itself, it will die. 
If you put a pig upon a donkey and the donkey urinates while this is the 
case, the pig will die at once. 
440 
Nowadays, this magical effect is credited to static electricity. 
441 
Marcasite: crystallized iron pyrite, FeS,. It is golden in color. 
442 
Algemest: a scribal error for amethyst, which traditionally had this property. 
The word "amethyst" comes from a Greek word meaning "not drunk." 
278 
C&e ^catrtP'ilLiber Jfcubeiw CEtrition 
When hail appears, if a woman who is menstruating casts herself upside 
down on the ground, uncovering herself completely and raising her thighs 
toward the cloud, hail will not fall around her on the field or the harvest. 
If a dog climbs on a mountain or a high place, and beneath it a certain 
animal called addabum goes past, and the shadows of the two animals touch 
each other, the dog will fall down and that animal will kill it. 
If someone with a quartan fever sits down on a wolfskin, he will be healed 
of the fever. 
If you put fifteen figures above a woman in labor, she will give birth easily 
and without danger. Put nutmeg seeds above someone with a quartan fever, 
and he will be healed ofthe fever. 
If you put elephant feces on a tree, the tree will bear no fruit while the 
feces remain there. If you put the same feces on a woman, she cannot become 
pregnant. 
There is a stone that draws urine from people with dropsy, but when it 
does so, it loses its virtue and is destroyed thereby. 
With the stone called ligia, quicksilver is congealed and made into a 
single body. 
If you put a spider's web on someone who has a quartan fever, he will 
be healed in a short time. If you combine it with the web of a cantharides 
beetle, he will be healed swiftly from everything. 
Asps and vipers who hear the cry of the ostrich will flee from that place. 
When you mix (..J443 with silver extracted from copper and purified of 
it, and with it strike a place where birds gather, the birds will not be able to 
depart from there, and thus will be captured. 
If you touch any meat with the head of the sea-rabbit, it will be turned 
into tiny pieces or into paste. If you put gold into mouse feces, it will be 
burned as though it were lead; and when it has thus been burnt and reduced 
to powder, if you put it in cat feces, it will be restored and flow back together. 
When gold is combined with any corporeal power, it is destroyed. If it 
is combined with marcasite and sulfur to be melted by itself, gold will be 
purified and refined. 
The stone malachite softens gold. If you put it together with gold and 
melt them, its combustion will take it away from the gold; whereas if you 
put borax with them, the effect will be better. If you quench gold in the 
juice of the leaves of quipos, it will be made apt for sophistication by many 
repetitions, losing its original infirmity;444 thus the salt of it becomes red. If 
443 
The word that belongs here is omitted in all the manuscripts. 
444 
A very complex sentence. To quench a metal is to put a hot piece of metal 
into a liquid; to sophisticate something, 111 medieval Latin (and English), is to exercise 
trickery on it. What is being discussed here, without saying so in so many words, is 
the manufacture of fake gold. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
279 
you put silver above the smoke of sulfur, it will become black, and when you 
put it in salt, the blackness goes away and it becomes white. 
Anoxatir has the property of drawing out of every body all the moisture 
that exists inside and outside it. Niter cleanses all bodies of moisture, and 
clears their surfaces. If you mix gold with the stone azure, it will increase 
the beauty and clarity of the gold. If you put it over fire, the azure stone will 
turn to flame and will depart, and will produce infirmities ofthe eyes. When 
marcasite is burned in sulfur, it enters into the Great Work; and from it is 
made the material of the work. Magnesia has in its body an admixture of 
lead, and without it, glassworking cannot be accomplished. Tutia gives a red 
color to gold, and takes away moisture from the eyes and frees them from 
all moist ailments. Best of all is white tutia. If you rub your teeth and gums 
with powdered crystal, the teeth will be made firm and the gums freed of 
corrosion. 
Ashes of burnt sea crabs take away illnesses ofthe eyes, and fortify the 
sight. If a dog eats a camel's spleen, it will die at once. If you put the dried 
feces of a dog fed on bones on an apostume ofthe throat, the apostume will 
dissolve and be healed at once. If you put the shell of a female turtle over a 
pot, it will never boil. 
The gebore tree is of two kinds, namely, male and female. If you give any 
woman five ounces ofthe female tree in a drink, she will have a great appetite 
to lie with a man; and the same will be done to a man if you give him the 
same amount ofthe male tree in food or drink. He will be greatly irritated, 
nor will he be able to be rid of the irritation unless you give him two ounces 
of vegetable ash in a drink. If anyone takes the flowers of this tree in a drink, 
he will continually break wind, nor will this cease as long as it remains in 
his stomach. If you give anyone the flower ofthe female tree in a drink, he 
will sleep three days without waking; if you wish to awaken him, give him 
hot water with olive oil to drink. If you grind the leaves of this tree and 
distemper them with sulfur water, it will heal wounds in a single day if you 
put it on them. 
If a serpent or scorpion is tied with the bark of this tree, it will die at 
once. 
Salt heals the stings of scorpions, wasps, and serpents. Purslane eaten one 
day after another constricts the blood, and when chewed, raw or cooked, it 
heals bites at once. 
If a ram sees a lion, it will die at once of natural causes. 
A tarantula will die if it sees a scorpion, and a serpent will die if it sees an 
owl. 
If anyone takes a ring of azure or of the stone cornelian on which these 
26 figures are carved, and wears it on his finger when he goes before a king 
280 
c & e ^icatrijc-iLtber Kubeufl dftitfon 
or some other aristocrat, he will be received nobly and well, and whatever he 
asks from him or them will be fulfilled with effect. Be very sure, however, 
that you do not get any of these figures wrong in any way; because if there 
should be any mistake among them, the ring will not work effectively. This is 
one ofthe wonders of this art. The figures are these: 
These figures are found in the book of Queen Folopedre. 
If you put this ring on a tarantula bite, and then bathe it with the 
patient's saliva, he will be cured at once. If you rub a tarantula bite with 
the leaves ofthe herb called yembut, one after another, it will be healed 
in an instant. Catran mixed with salt heals wounds made by a serpent. If 
a man anoints his penis with catran and lies with a woman, she will not 
become pregnant. Eating hazelnuts heals tarantula bites; thus anyone who 
carries hazelnuts with him will not be killed by a tarantula bite. If someone 
who is bitten by a mad dog puts chewed bitter almonds on the wound, 
and eats them, he will be healed ofthe wound. If you put the herb called 
southernwood on a viper bite, it will be healed instantly; if the juice of this 
herb is sprinkled through the house, fleas will go mad, and if they fall into 
that juice, they will die. 
If you burn tarantulas, and mix the ashes into bread and give it to 
someone who suffers from the stone, the stone will break, and that person will 
be healed. Flour ofthe seeds ofthe herb named vetch will heal bites from a 
mad dog if it is put on them. 
XT<U> 
^ u r 
Boob 4 Chapter 
4 
281 
Chapter Nine 
Images whose virtues perform marvels, that were found in a book 
that was discovered in the church of Coredib and the book of Queen 
Folopedre; and a description of all the rules necessary in working with 
magical images 
e find in the book that was discovered in the chamber of Queen 
Folopedre, composite images that accomplish wonderful effects 
and marvelous works by their properties and virtues. We 
propose in this book of ours to make mention of these, so that this science 
may not be deficient in anything. 
For healing the bites of reptiles. Take the bile of a kite dried in the 
shade, and mix it with an equal part of fennel juice, and store it in a glass 
bottle. This powder may be applied to the eyes, and it will cure and heal the 
bites of tarantulas, vipers, wasps, asps, and other reptiles. If the bite should 
be on the right side, let this powder be put on the left, and if the bite is on 
the left, let the powder be put on the right. When you wish to do this, add an 
equal amount of water; and do as we have said three times in succession. 
That asps leave their holes. Take shards of glass and filings of yellow 
brass. Melt them in a crucible, and add red azernec4,15 and red magnesia; then 
take this from the fire and break it into little pieces. Then take the head of 
a kite and its bones (specifically, the kite that is found in the land of Egypt), 
and mix it with black galbanum. Melt it again on the fire, and let it be mixed 
with the other medicine; when this is done, take it off the fire. Make out of it 
a sistrum, which in our language is called a rattle, and let a grain be put into 
it ofthe diamongs that are found in the land of Egypt. When you have done 
this, strike with it on the mouths of the holes of vipers, serpents, and other 
reptiles. When serpents hear the beating of a sistrum compounded in the 
aforesaid way, they will leave their holes at once without endangering the one 
who plays the sistrum. The property of the aforesaid bird (that is, the kite 
already mentioned) is that, when it cries and asps hear it, they are driven from 
their holes and are killed by its voice. 
For gathering mice in one place. Take the juice of the leaves of white 
grape vines, squill juice, borax, henbane, and red Indian tutia. Powder the 
borax and tutia, and mix them with the aforesaid juices; and make pills the 
size of a chickpea, and let them dry in the shade. When you wish mice to 
gather together, put one ofthe said pills on burning coals. When mice smell 
445 
Red azernec: cuprous oxide, C u , 0 . 
282 
jGCfpe ^tcatrv-iltber l&ubeua coition 
the smoke, they will all gather at that place, and you may do with them as 
you will. 
That fishes will gather together at the place you choose. Take millet, 
which you should allow to rot. When it is rotten, combine it with fat, 
powdered fava beans, and bull's blood, and mix it well enough that it all 
becomes a single mass. Then put it in a reed, and fit it with a hempen thread. 
Then cast the reed into a place where there are fishes; all the fishes in that 
place will gather around the reed, and you will be able to take them with a net 
if you wish. 
For catching birds sleeping in trees. Take fat of land turtles, lirium 
seeds, sweet myrrh, and condisum in equal parts. Powder them all and mix 
well together. Make a mass of it with donkey's urine, and make of it pills the 
size of a chickpea, which you should allow to dry in the shade. When the 
working is performed, take an earthen vessel full of burning coals, and place 
in it one of the said pills, and with this suffumigate a place where there are 
birds; and cover your nostrils with silk so that you do not smell the smoke. 
All the birds who smell the said smoke will fall to the ground as though dead, 
and you may catch them at will. If you wish to heal them, wash their feet in 
hot water, and they will be healed. 
For the same. Take mandrake and ammoniac, and mix it with the juice 
of green hemlock. Make pills from it, and allow them to dry. Suffumigate 
with them under a tree where there are birds; but do this when the weather 
is calm and without wind. All the birds who smell that smoke will fall to the 
ground as though dead. 
For sharpening vision. Make a crown out ofthe roots of a certain tree 
called catlam, which I believe is the same as gobore, and put it on your head. 
While you carry it on your head, your sight will be so invigorated that you 
can see the smallest things far away. When you take it off your head, your 
sight will return to its original state. If you anoint morphews with the juice 
of the leaves of that tree mixed with wine vinegar, they will instantly be cured. 
That someone will not become drunk. Make a vessel of brass as subtly 
as you are able. Then take equal parts of wine alcohol distilled in an alembic, 
cabbage juice, and juice of cypress, and mix them all together. When this 
is done, quench the vessel in the foregoing mixture until it has absorbed a 
pound of it; then take the same vessel out ofthe mixture. When you wish to 
drink, anoint the vessel with oil of bitter almonds, and drink from it as much 
as you wish, and you will never become drunk. 
That flies will not approach a table. Take fresh condisum, yellow 
auripigment, and dried earth of Cofan, grind all of them well and pulverize 
them completely, and then mix them will squill juice. Anoint the table with 
it, and also anoint your hands. From the aforesaid mixture, make an image in 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
285 
the form of a fly, and put it on the table, and as long as it stands on the table 
no fly will remain there. 
For expelling asps and reptiles. Take a leopard skin, which is tanned 
and softened like leather, and from it make a blanket. No venomous beast 
will be able to remain in that place. 
For banishing asps. Take round aristolochia, and mix it with the flesh 
of a racanus, which is a large green lizard. Grind this together very well, and 
add to it the gall of a lion. Make pills of this; when you wish to work with 
them, distemper one ofthe pills with water ofanoxatir, and with it write on 
paper or parchment that which you wish to write; and tie this up in a cloth. 
All asps will flee from anyone who carries this cloth with him, and if any asp 
touches the said cloth, it will die at once. 
That vapors will rise up like fire. Take the root of the herb that is called 
cotrop; this herb shines at night as though it were a candle. Grind the root 
well with the brain of a deer and the gall of a cow, and make pills of it. If you 
put one of them in a fire of dung, marvelous smoke will rise, by which the 
whole sky will appear to be red, and vapors will rise that will appear similar to 
flames of fire. All who see this will be frightened. You ought not to do this, 
however, except when the weather is cloudy and still. 
If this light is in front of you, you will see nothing, but if it is behind 
you, you will see everything that is in the house. Take dolphin fat, and 
a wick rubbed all over with powdered azernec and aziniar. Put the ft into a 
crucible made of brass, and in the crucible put the aforesaid wick. Light it; 
it makes a light such that, if anyone holds it in his hand, he will see nothing, 
but if anyone has it behind him he will see everything that is in the house. 
That a woman will not become pregnant. Make the image of an ape 
in brass, and perforate it through the spine; into the opening, put scammony. 
When you want to lie with a woman, tie the said image to your thighs, and 
the woman will not become pregnant. 
That dogs will not bark at you. Take mandrake root, and when it is well 
ground, mix it with a bitch's milk. Make the image of a dog from it, and dogs 
will not bark at you, but will all flee from you. 
That iron will be turned into water. Take equal parts of the herb called 
camesir, squill, and green pomegranate husks. Let all be well ground, mixed 
together, and distempered with wine vinegar; and distill it with an alembic. 
Repeatedly quench iron in that vinegar, and it will be turned to water. Let it 
stay thus for an hour and a half; and then take away the vinegar. You will find 
the iron shining and running and gathered together in one. 
That cloth will burn without fire. Take golden marcasite, which you 
should grind very finely; and mix it with the strongest wine vinegar. Distill 
it with an alembic into a glass vessel, and then bury it in manure and leave it 
284 
ID&e ^catriF-Jliber Hubeua d^Dttton 
there for the space of 14 days. Then take it out, and again put it in bran for 
the same number of days. Then take it out and with it anoint any cloth you 
wish, and that cloth will be burned by it as though by fire. 
A water that burns, and appears entirely red. Take lime of Cyprus, 
which you have roasted well in a hot oven, and leave it there for one night. 
In the morning, take it out, and you will find that it has become completely 
red. If it is not, let it remain there for another night until it becomes red; 
and when it is red, take it out. Grind it well, and pour distilled wine vinegar 
onto it, the quantity thereof being five times the quantity of the lime. Then 
put it in a glass vessel and leave it for three days, and mix it three times each 
day. Then set it to boil, or better still to foam; from it will issue a red water 
the color of jargoons.446 Put the water in a crucible, in which you should put 
a lighted wick. This water will burn; and by its light the whole house will 
appear to be red in color (that is, the color of jargoons), and the whole house 
will sparkle like a jargoon. 
For making green tarantulas that kill by biting. When you want to do 
this, fast for a whole day until nightfall. At night, take the herbcalled wild 
basil, which you should chew well; and put what you have chewed into a glass 
jar, the mouth of which you should seal well. Put it in a dark house where 
neither the sun nor any other light is visible, and let it stay there for forty 
days. Then take it from there, and in it you will find green tarantulas which, 
if they bite any man, they will kill him. These tarantulas have a property: if 
you put them in olive oil in the sun, and let them stay there for 21 days or 
some similar time, they will die and be dissolved into the oil. If you anoint 
tarantula bites with that oil, they will be healed; and if a drop of it falls on a 
tarantula, it will die in an instant. 
For making red serpents. Take the webs of large spiders, and put them 
in donkey's milk in a glass jar. Leave them there for three days, and they will 
be consumed and vanish from the milk. Let turtle fat be added to it, and let 
it be mixed well, until it takes on the consistency of brains. Let all this be 
put into a red linen cloth, and buried in manure for seven days; at the end of 
which you will find red serpents. If you put them in a place where there are 
frogs, the serpents will be made in the form of dragons, for frogs in the land 
of Egypt are inimical to dragons; because when they see dragons they bite 
them, and proceed to wound the dragons until they die. 
For making insects flee. Take one hair from the mane of a virgin mare, 
which you should take the first time a stallion mounts her. Then make knots 
in the form of insects in that hair, aas many of them as you can, until it looks 
like a bunch of grapes. Then take the said hair, and put it in a vessel of yellow 
446 
Jargoons: this word usually means "zircon," hut these are not red, and 
"jargoon" has already been explained in Book II, chapter 5 as a term for the ruby. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
285 
brass, the mouth of which you should seal up tightly, and bury this in the 
middle ofthe house. Insects will not be able to enter that house while the 
aforesaid vessel remains there. 
To make a light from whatever wood you wish. Take fat from a sea 
dog, and mix it with oil of laurel, soap, and a little sulfur, until these are 
well mixed together. If you smear this on any wood you wish, a light will be 
ignited in the form of a candle, nor will it be extinguished until the wood is 
consumed. The foregoing working is from the works of Antiochus. 
For causing wolves and all noxious animals to flee. This work is 
done with a drum specially made for it, which is composed thus. Take a sea 
hedgehog; cut off its head, and extract its spines. Skin it, and prepare and 
anoint the skin as you would any other skin. Then take the skin, and stretch 
it well over a frame drum or a kettledrum of brass, and save it for use. When 
you desire the aforementioned beasts to flee, beat the said frame drum or 
kettledrum at night, because all evil beasts will flee from its sound, and all 
reptiles that hear it will die. 
That firogs will depart from a lake. Take the fat of atimzach and mix it 
with wax. From it make a candle with a wick. Burn the candle in any place 
you wish; and the croaking of frogs will be wholly extinguishes. 
To catch tarantulas. Take agnum castum and white cardellum, and 
break them up together. Add to them red galbanum and bezoar stone finely 
powdered, and blend all these with the juice of sarza. Out of this mass make 
the image of a tarantula, and out of what is left over ofthe confection, make 
pills, which should be dried in the shade. Then put the aforesaid image 
before you, and cast the pills into fire as a suffumigation; all the tarantulas 
in that place will gather together before the image. I believe, however, that 
the virtue of the suffumigation has greater influence than the image in the 
foregoing. 
We have taken all the aforesaid images and confections from the book 
The Chaldean Agricidture, and have decided to copy down this much of it so 
that this book of ours may be more complete. You who intend to read this 
book, however, should keep it as secret as you can, and do not reveal it to 
anyone unless he is worthy, apt, and disposed to this art. Such people are few 
in number; nor will you be able to discover these secrets unless you yourself 
are one of them. 
Always remember the aphorisms and teachings that Zucrat the sage 
taught his students at the end of his life. First: let your natures be so 
disposed and ordered that you perfectly understand this art, and those things 
Pertaining to it, in and of themselves; you will thus gain the greatest assistance 
in your work. Second: let your secrets and purifications be displayed only in 
your hearts when the times are not safe, remembering that just as the times 
286 
jQC&e iHcattv-lLtber Kubeu* CKrition 
will change for the worse, they will also change for the better. Third: that it 
will never occur to you, when you have gained wealth and power, to despise 
and take for granted what you have done. Fourth: to ask little from your 
friends and create good will little by little, as a child grows, nor to display to 
them your love or your benefits suddenly, or in any way other than little by 
little; for if someone desires something from you and receives it all at once, his 
friendship will not endure, but he will be more likely to become an enemy. 
Fifth, as far as you are able, to avoid deceitful and shameful dealings, for by 
them nobility is list and goodness corrupted. Sixth: rejoice in your friends, 
and do not ask from them everything you have a right to demand; keep this 
rule and your friendships will endure. Seventh: do not continually criticize 
your friends for the things that they do; for you will be disposed to do such 
things, and similar things, yourself. Eighth: do not respond insultingly to 
anyone who seeks something from you; for such requests are a distinct sign 
of blessings upon the good things you have received from God by means of 
His grace. Petitions from the poor, especially, you should fulfill effectually to 
the extent that you can, if they are made in a becoming manner; and in doing 
so, you ought to give thanks to God unceasingly for the station and power 
to which He has guided you, so that you are able to benefit those who seek 
you; for when this is the case, it reveals a right and laudable intention and 
prosperity in God. Ninth: know what things are good and natural for the 
powers, because by this your own virtues will be known to them, and they 
will delight in you; for they will delight in you to the same degree that you 
delight in them. These precepts Zucrat the sage taught to his pupils at the 
end of his life; they are the foundations ofthe usefulness of magic. 
I will also explain the seven teachings that Pythagoras approved. First: 
you should balance all things by proportion, and keep them in their proper 
disposition. Second: govern your friendships and loves, and act on them 
as far as is healthy. Third: do not light a fire in a green place, as a sword 
will cut it off. Fourth: govern your desires and appetites and measure their 
importance correctly by their effect; thus your body will be maintained in 
perfect health. Fifth: make yourself accustomed to the straight and equal; 
thus the love and friendship of the people toward you will increase. Sixth: 
observe the times and employ them as lords and judges do, observing what 
is required in the world for the preservation of life. Seven: do not harm or 
contaminate your spirits or your bodies; rather, observe a proper temperance, 
so that you will always be able to work with them according to the necessities 
ofthe times. 
Here, however, are the 28 Mansions ofthe Moon according to Pliny. 
The first mansion is for destruction and depopulation and this 
Mansion is called Alnath. While the Moon is passing through this Mansion, 
Boob 4 C&apter 9 
make the image of a black man with his hair wrapped and encircled, standing 
on his feet, having in his right hand a spear in the manner of a warrior. 
Make this image in a iron ring; and suffumigate it with liquid storax. 
Make 
a seal with the ring in black wax and say: "You, Geriz, kill N son of N, or N 
wife of N, quickly and speedily and destroy them." Heed this and it will be as 
you wish. Know that Geriz is the name ofthe lord of this mansion. 
The second Mansion is Albotayn and is for the removal of anger. 
When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, take white wax and mastic 
and melt them together over a fire. Then remove this from the fire and make 
the form of a crowned king. Suffumigate it with lignum aloes, and say: "You, 
Enedil, drive away this anger from me, and let me be reconciled with him, 
and let my petition be satisfactory to him." Keep this image with you, and it 
shall be done. Know that Enedil is the name of the lord of this Mansion. . 
The third Mansion is Azoraye (that is, the Pleiades) and is for the 
acquisition of all good things. Make the figure of a seated woman with 
her right hand over her head, and wrap it in cloth, suffumigate it with musk, 
camphor, mastic and aromatic oils. Say: "You, Annuncia, make it so." Make 
the image in a silver ring with a square table, and put it upon your finger and 
it will be as you wish. Know that Annuncia is the name of the lord of this 
mansion. 
The fourth Mansion is Aldebaran and is for obtaining enmity. Take 
red wax and when the Moon is passing through this Mansion, make the 
image of a knight riding on a horse, holding a serpent in his right hand, and 
suffumigate the image with red myrrh and storax. And say, "You, Assarez, 
make it so and fulfill my request," and ask for things pertaining to hatred, 
separation and ill will. It will be completely done as you have requested. 
Know that Assarez is the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. 
The fifth Mansion is Almizen and is for receiving good from kings 
and high officials. When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, fashion 
a figure from silver and in it sculpt a head without a body, and above the 
head write the name of the lord of this Mansion and your petition and 
suffumigate it with sandalwood, and say: "You, Cabil, do such and such for 
me and let my petition be granted and let me receive good things and the best 
from the king and his councilors." When you have done this carry the seal in 
a box, and your request will be fulfilled. When you wish to see something 
when you sleep, place the talisman under your head at night when you sleep, 
thinking always in your mind about what you wish, and you will get an 
answer for what you seek. Know that Assarez is the name of the lord of this 
Mansion. 
The sixth Mansion is Achaya and it is for putting love between two 
people. When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, make two images 
288 
^catnr-JLiber Hubeufi (Coition 
from white wax, make them embrace each other, and wrap them in white silk. 
Suffumigate them with amber and lignum aloes, and say: "You, Nedeyrahe, 
bring together so and so and so and so, and place between them friendship 
and love." It will be as you wish. Know that Nedeyrahe is the name of the 
lord of this Mansion. 
The seventh Mansion is Aldira and is for the acquisition of all good 
things. When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, fashion a seal of 
silver, and sculpt the image of a man clothed in robes and with his hands 
extended to heaven in the manner of a man who is praying and supplicating; 
in the breast ofthe image write the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. 
Suffumigate it with sweet smelling things, and say: "You, Siely, cause such 
and such to happen, and grant my petition." Ask for whatever you wish that 
pertains to good things. Carry the image with you and it will be as you wish. 
Know that Selehe is the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. 
Hie eighth Mansion is Annathra and is for gaining victory. When 
the Moon is passing through this Mansion, fashion from tin the image of an 
eagle with the face of a man, and on its breast inscribe the name of the lord of 
this Mansion. Suffumigate it with sulfur, and say: "You, Annediex, do such 
and such for and grant my petition." When this image has been completed in 
this fashion, take it with you into battle and you shall be victorious and shall 
prevail. Know that Annediex is the name of the lord of this Mansion. 
The ninth Mansion is Atarfa and is for causing infirmity. When the 
Moon has passed into this Mansion, make a lead image of a eunuch holding 
his hands over his eyes, and on his neck inscribe the name of the Lord of the 
Mansion. Suffumigate the image with pine resin and say: "You, Raubel, make 
N son of N die of sickness or N son of N's blood to flow." Ask for which one 
of these two that you wish, it will be completed if you follow the right path 
as we have explained above. And know that Raubel is the name ofthe lord of 
this Mansion. 
The tenth Mansion is Algebha and is for the cure of infirmities and 
to make childbirth easy. When the Moon is in this mansion, fashion from 
gold or brass the head of a lion,, and above it write the name of the lord of 
this Mansion. Suffumigate the image with amber, and say: "You, Aredafir, lift 
up sadness, slowness and infirmity from my heart and body and whomever 
consumes or drinks liquid in which this seal has been washed." And on 
whatever day you have suffumigated it, then it shall be carried to the sick or 
the infirm and wash it with another substance to be consumed against illness 
or for women who have had a difficult birth. Know that Aredafir is the name 
of the lord of this Mansion. 
The eleventh Mansion is Azobra, and it is that you will be feared and 
receive good things. When the Moon is in this Mansion, make in a table 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
289 
of gold the image of a man riding a lion, holding a lance in his right hand 
and holding the ear ofthe lion with his left hand, and in front of this figure 
write the name of the lord of this Mansion. Say: "You, Necol, bring glory to 
me that I shall be feared by men, and so that their fear shall cause them to 
tremble when they behold me; and quiet the heart ofthe king and of lords 
and of men of high estate that they may grant me honors and dignities." 
Carry this tablet with you, and it shall be as you have requested. Know that 
Necol is the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. 
The twelfth Mansion is Azarfa, and it is for the separation of two 
lovers. When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, fashion in black 
lead the image of a dragon fighting with a man, and in front of this figure 
write the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. Suffumigate the image with the 
hair of a lion mixed with asafoetida, and say: "You, Abdizu, break apart and 
separate such a one from such a one." Bury this image in the place that you 
wish, and it shall be as you desire. And know that Abdizu is the name of the 
lord of this Mansion. 
The thirteenth Mansion is Alahue, and it is for the liberation of men 
who are not able to come to women and for putting love between men 
and women. When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, fashion from 
red wax the image of an erect man (that is, with an erect penis); and let it be 
in all ways the image of a man desiring to couple with a woman. From white 
wax fashion the image of a woman. Bind the two images together face to 
face, and suffumigate them with amber and lignum aloes, and wrap them in 
a piece of white silk which has been washed in rosewater; and on either image 
write the name of the one you desire. If a woman shall carry these images 
with her, she will be most strongly desired by the man whose name is upon 
the image - which is to say, when he sees her. If another is tied or bound , 
who is not able to perform with women, if he shall carry the images with him 
it shall be dissolved and he will be able to perform with women. Know that 
the name ofthe lord of this Mansion is Azerut. 
The fourteenth Mansion is Azimech, and it is for the separating 
of men from women. When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, 
fashion from red wax the image of a dog with his own tail held in his mouth. 
Suffumigate it with the hair of a dog and the hair of a cat, and say: "You, 
Erdegel, break apart and divide such a one from such a woman through 
enmity and ill will." And name whatever persons you wish, and bury the 
image in the place where they are. And know that the name ofthe lord of this 
Mansion is Erdegel. 
The fifteenth Mansion is Algafra, and it is for the acquisition of 
friendship and good will. When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, 
make in ink the figure of a seated man, holding scrolls in his hand as if 
290 
C&e Ptcatrir-Jitter Kitten* Coition 
reading them. Suffumigate it with frankincense and nutmeg and say: "You, 
Achalich, do such and such for me, and accomplish my petition." You may 
ask him for the joining together of friends and lovers, and any thing which 
pertains to them, and this image should then be carried with you. And know 
that Achalich is the name of the lord of this Mansion. 
The sixteenth Mansion is Azebene, and it is for the making of money 
(which is to say, in selling and buying). When the Moon is passing through 
this Mansion, fashion in a plate of silver the figure of a man seated in a throne 
and carrying a scale in his hands. Suffumigate the image with fine odors, and 
set it out under the stars for seven nights, saying each night: "You, Azeruch, 
make such and such happen for me, and accomplish my request." Ask of it 
pertaining to selling and buying. Know that Azeruch is the name ofthe lord 
of this Mansion. 
The seventeenth Mansion is Alichil, and it is so that thieves may not 
enter into the house and other criminals likewise. When the Moon has 
entered this Mansion, fashion the figure of a monkey in an iron seal, holding 
his hands above his shoulders. Suffumigate it with the hair of a monkey and 
the hair of a female mouse, and wrap it in a monkey skin. It should then be 
buried in your house, while saying: "You, Adrieb, guard all my things and 
everything that exists within this house, nor let it be entered by thieves." 
When the foregoing has been done, thieves will flee from your house. Know 
that Adrieb is the name of the lord of this Mansion. 
Hie eighteenth Mansion is Alcab, and it is for taking away fevers and 
infirmities of the belly. When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, 
fashion from wax the image of an adder holding its tail above its head. 
Suffumigate" it with the horn of a stag and say: You, Egribel, guard this 
house of mine that no serpent may enter nor any other hurtful beast." Place 
the image in a vessel which should be buried beneath your house; when the 
aforesaid has been done, then no serpent will be able to enter nor any other 
hurtful creature. If the image is to relieve a fever or illness of the belly, carry 
this image with you and it will cure you. Know that Egrebel is the name of 
the lord of this Mansion. 
The nineteenth Mansion is Axaula, and it is for bringing on the 
menses in women. When the Moon has passed around to this Mansion, 
fashion from heme (which is a kind of bronze) a seal, and engrave in it the 
image of a woman holding her hands before her face. Suffumigate it with 
liquid storax and say: "You, Annucel, cause the blood to flow from such 
and such a woman" - name her here. And it shall be as you ask. If a woman 
keeps this image tied about her waist, she will give birth quickly and without 
danger. Know that Annucel is the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. 
The twentieth Mansion is Alnaym, and it is for hunting on land. 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
291 
When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, fashion in a plate of tin a 
figure having the head and arms of a man, the body of a horse with four feet 
and having a tail, holding a bow in its hands.447 Suffumigate 
it with the hair of a wolf, and say: "You, Queyhuc, cause me to take all I hunt 
in the world, and let them come to me swiftly." Carry the image with you 
and you shall easily take anything in the world that you hunt. Know that 
Queyhuc is the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. 
The twenty-first Mansion is Albelda, and it is for destruction. When 
the Moon is passing through this Mansion, fashion the image of a man 
having two faces, with one facing forward and one facing behind. Suffumigate 
it with sulfur and carob, and say: "You, Bectue, depopulate such and such a 
place and destroy it." Then place the image in a small bag and place sulfur and 
carabe with it along with some hair , and bury it in the place that you wish, 
and it shall be as you have requested. Know that Bectue is the name of the 
lord of this Mansion. 
The twenty-second Mansion is Sadahaca. It is for binding tongues 
so that they do not say anything bad about you. When the Moon is in this 
mansion make an iron ring and engrave in it the figure of a man with winged 
feet wearing a helmet and suffumigate it with mercury.'1'"' And inscribe this 
image in iron for the safety of fugitives. And say: "You, Geliel, bind these 
tongues so they cannot say bad things and make me secure and let N. escape 
safely from his enemies." Carry this ring with you and make a seal in black 
wax with the ring to bind tongues. Know that the name ofthe lord of this 
Mansion is Geliel. 
The twenty-third Mansion is Zaadebola, and it is for destruction and 
devastation. When the Moon is passing through this Mansion, fashion a seal 
of iron in which you should sculpt the image of a cat having a dog's head. 
Suffumigate it with the hair of a dog, and say: "You, Zequebin, drive out 
everyone from such and such a place, and destroy and devastate it." When 
this Mansion has come to the Ascendant, set this seal out under the stars, 
and the following night bury the aforesaid seal in the place which you wish 
to destroy. It shall be as you desire. Know that the name of the lord of this 
Mansion is Zequebin. 
The twenty-fourth Mansion is Caadezod, and it is for the increase 
of herds. When the Moon has passed into this Mansion, take the horn of a 
castrated ram which is well cleaned and made appropriate, and in it fashion 
the figure of a woman with her son in her arms, in the likeness of one who is 
nursing. Suffumigate it with the scrapings which have been taken from the 
447 
That is, a centaur carrying a bow. 
448 
That is, with the herb named mercury; a suffumigation of metallic mercury 
is an unusually unpleasant method of suicide. 
292 
ID&e W a t t i v M b n Kubeufi Litton 
aforesaid horn, and say: "You, Abrine, improve and guard this herd." After 
this, hang the image about the neck of one of the rams of this herd; if you 
wish to work with herds of cows, fashion this image in the horn of a bull, and 
hang it around the neck of a bull, and the herd will be augmented as has been 
said and death shall not overtake it. Know that Abrine is the name ofthe lord 
of this Mansion. 
The twenty-fifth Mansion is Zaadalahbia, and it is for the protection 
of orchards and crops from evil accidents. When the Moon is in that 
Mansion, fashion a seal in fig wood, and sculpt in it the figure of a man in 
the likeness of one who is planting trees. Suffumigate it with the flowers of 
these trees, and say: "You, Aziel, guard my crops and my orchards that any 
destruction or ill fortune may not befall them." Place the aforesaid image in 
one of the trees in the place which you wish to guard. While the image which 
was made continues there, destruction shall not befall the crops. And know 
that Aziel is the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. 
The twenty-sixth Mansion is Alfarg the Former, and it is for the 
creation of love. When the Moon is passing through it, take white wax and 
mastic and melt them together; from these fashion the image of a woman 
with her hair unbound and before her a vessel placed as if to receive her hair. 
Suffumigate it withe sweet-smelling odors, and say: "You, Tagriel, bring me to 
the love and friendship of such and such a woman." Place the image in a small 
bag, and place with it also some of the most sweet-smelling of substances; 
carry it with you, and it shall be completed as you have requested. Know that 
Tagriel is the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. 
The twenty-seventh Mansion is Alfarg the Latter, and it is for the 
destruction of springs and wells. When the Moon is passing through it, take 
red earth, and in it fashion the image of a winged man, holding a perforated 
dish in his hands, and raising it to his mouth. Afterward put it into the fire 
until it is hard. After this place in the vessel asafoetida and liquid storax, 
and say: "You, Abliemel, destroy such and such a spring of such and such a 
man," and name him here as you wish. Throw the image into his spring, and 
it shall be destroyed and the spring shall no more come forth. And know that 
Abliemel is the name ofthe lord of this Mansion. 
The twenty-eighth Mansion is Arrexe, and it is for bringing fish 
together in one place. When the Moon has come to this Mansion, fashion 
of henc (which is a kind of bronze) a seal, in which you should fashion the 
image of a fish having a colored spine on which you should write the name of 
the lord of this Mansion. Suffumigate it with the skin of a sea fish; after this, 
tie a string around it and throw it in the water in the place where you wish 
the fish to come together. All ofthe fish in the area nearby will immediately 
gather together about it, and allow you to harvest them. And know that 
Boob 4 Chapter 4 
293 
Anuxi is the name of the lord of this Mansion. 
You should know that on all the aforesaid images you ought to write 
the name of the lord ofthe mansion, and your petition with it. In all those 
that are made for good, and to cause gathering, uniting, and generating 
friendship and love, you ought to write on the chest ofthe figure; and in all 
workings that are done to cause disunion, separation, and to generate enmity 
and ill will, you ought to write behind the shoulders (that is, along the spine 
of the image); while in all workings that are done to acquire glory, honor, 
and advancement, you ought to write on the head of that image. Thus it is 
finished. 
The prayer of Saturn. Quermiex, Tos, Herus, Quemis, Dius, Tamines, 
Tahytos, Macader, Quehinen: Saturn! Come swiftly with your spirits. 
The prayer of Jupiter. Bethniehus, Darmexim, Maciem, Maxar, Derix, 
Tahix, Tayros, Deheydex, Mebguedex: Jupiter! Come swiftly with your 
spirits. 
The prayer of Mars. Guebdemis, Hegneydiz, Gueydenuz, Magras, 
Herdehus, Hewbdegabdis, Mehyras, Dehydemes: Red Mars, Baharam! 
Come swiftly with your spirits. 
The prayer of the Sun. Beydelux, Demeymes, Adulex, Metnegayn, 
Atmefex, Naquiris, Gadix: Sun! Come swiftly with your spirits. 
The prayer ofVenus. Deydex, Gueylus, Meylus, Demerix, Albimex, 
Centus, Angaras, Dehetarix: Venus, Neyrgat! Come swiftly with your spirits. 
The prayer of Mercury. Barhuyex, Emirex, Hamerix, Sehix, Deryx, 
Meyer, Deherix, Baix, Faurix: write, Mercury! Come swiftly with your 
spirits. 
The prayer of the Moon. Guernus, Hedus, Maranus, Miltas, Taymex, 
Ranix, Mehyelus, Degayus: Moon! Come swiftly with your spirits. 
Leyequin, Leyelgane, Leyequir, Leyequerich, Leyeric, Leyerus, Leyexeris. 
Write these names on a glove, which you then burn; and while it burns, read 
the aforesaid names aloud. By this love and friendship will be moved. 
JCfjt* complete* ttje boob of $icatrijc tfye *age on aitrologp. 
294 
jEEIjc Mcatrij^Jlibn: Hubeus dftrttfon 
Glossary 
adunate: a technical term in medieval philosophy, meaning "entirely 
unified." 
amicable aspect: in astrology, a trine or sextile aspect 
adverse aspect: in astrology, a square or opposite aspect 
almutaz: the planet ruling an astrological chart, calculated by one of several 
traditional methods; also called almuten. 
ammoniac: Doremti ammoniacum, a Middle Eastern herb; not to be 
confused with the mineral sal ammoniac 
angles: in astrology, the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth houses of the 
horoscope, also called cardines or cardinal houses 
anima Mundi: the soul or consciousness ofthe universe, identified in 
Picatrix with the ninth sphere or primum mobile 
Arabic parts: points on the horoscope often calculated from the relative 
positions of two planets and one of the house cusps 
Aristotle: Greek philosopher, 384-322 BCE. During the Middle Ages, he 
was credited with many magical handbooks, none of which he actually 
wrote; nearly all references to him in Picatrix are to this pseudonymous 
literature. 
aspect: in astrology, angular relationships between planets that bring their 
effects into interaction; traditionally trine (120°) and sextile (60°) are the 
amicable (favorable) aspects, and opposition (180°) and square (90°) are 
the adverse (unfavorable) aspects 
augury: the art of divination from natural omens such as the flight of birds 
azernec: either cupric oxide, CuO, or cuprous oxide, Cu,0; the latter is 
called red azernec 
bdellium: resin from the guggul tree, Commiphora wightii, a close relative of 
the myrrh tree, used for incense 
benefic: in astrology, positive or favorable 
bezoar: a stonelike mass sometimps found in the stomachs of goats, sheep, 
and other grazing animals, much used in medieval medicine as a cure for 
poison 
black bile: also known as melancholy, one ofthe four humors of medieval 
medicine, associated with the element of earth 
blood: one ofthe four humors of medieval medicine, associated with the 
element of air 
cadent: in astrology, three houses or signs away, generally from the 
Ascendant or other angles, 
cadent houses: in astrology, the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses of 
295 
the horoscope 
calcination: another of the twelve standard alchemical processes, the act of 
subjecting a solid to heat until it is reduced to white ash 
calcitarat: according to Picatrix, the Hindu term for a suffumigation. 
cardinal houses: see angles 
cardines: see angles 
ceruse: lead carbonate, PbCO ( 
cinnabar: mercuric sulfide (HgS), a poisonous ore of mercury, 
choler: see yellow bile 
coadunation: in medieval physics, the fusion of the four elements in a 
material substance, or any other unification of separate things as one 
coction: transforming a substance by keeping it at a steady heat for a period 
of time 
collyrium: an ointment put on the eyelids. 
colocynth: a species of bitter melon found in the Middle East and used in 
medieval medicine, also known as wild citrull. 
combust: in astrology, within 8° 30' ofthe Sun 
commanding signs: in astrology, the signs ofthe Zodiac from Aries to 
Virgo 
common signs: in astrology, Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces 
complexion: in medieval medical theory, the balance of humors in a body; 
see humors 
confection: a mixture of magically powerful substances 
conjunction: in astrology, the meeting of two planets in the same degree 
of the Zodiac; in traditional astrology this technically not an aspect but it 
is generally treated similarly, 
corruption: in medieval science, the process by which things go out of 
existence; normally paired with generation 
cubit: a unit of measure equal to the distance along the forearm and hand 
from the elbow to the tip ofthe longest finger 
debility: in astrology, a planet is said to have debility or be debilitated when 
it is in the sign of its detriment or fall, or in hostile aspect to one of the 
infortunes, or in one of the four cadent houses or otherwise afflicted, 
decan: see face 
dexter aspect: in astrology, an aspect in which the swifter planet moves away 
from the slower one. 
dignity: in astrology, a planet is said to have dignity or be dignified when 
it is in a sign, term, or face that it rules, or the sign of its exaltation or 
triplicity, or in amicable aspect to one ofthe fortunes, or in one ofthe 
four cardinal houses or otherwise made fortunate, 
direct: in astrology, a planet is direct when it moves along the ecliptic in its 
Efye i?icatnj^Jliber Kubeiw d^ition 
normal direction; the opposite of retrograde 
direct ascension, signs ofi in astrology, the signs from Capricorn through 
Gemini 
election: in astrology, the art of selecting in advance a time when a desired 
astrological influence is at its peak 
electuary: a medicine blended with sugar or honey 
elementary: pertaining to the four elements, or to the part of the universe 
below the circle of the Moon, where the four elements exist; see 
elements 
elements: in medieval physics, earth, air, water, and fire, which are 
combinations ofthe qualities acting in matter rather than material 
substances in their own right 
elixir: in alchemy, the philosopher's stone, a substance able to transmute 
ordinary metals into silver or gold 
face: in astrology, a division of 10° or 1/3 of a zodiacal sign, also called a 
decan; each face is ruled by a planet using a variety of systems, 
first matter: in medieval science, the prima materia or quintessence, the 
perfectly transparent and luminous substance out of which the heavens 
are made 
fixed signs: in astrology, Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius 
form: in medieval science, the basic characteristics of a material substance, 
rather than the outward shape taken by that substance 
fortunes, the: in astrology, the planets Jupiter and Venus 
galbanum: the resin of an Asian plant, Ferula galbaniflua, which was used as 
an incense 
generation: in medieval science, the process by which things come into 
existence; normally paired with corruption 
genus: a general category to which one or more species belongs; see species 
geomancy: an art of divination, very popular in the Middle Ages, that 
used sixteen figures of single and double points generated by random 
methods to create the equivalent of an astrological chart and answer 
questions 
gum ammoniac: the gum of Dorema ammoniacum, a Middle Eastern herb; 
not to be confused with sal ammoniac 
hayz: in astrology, a condition in which a masculine, diurnal planet is above 
the earth in the daytime in a masculine sign, or a feminine, nocturnal 
planet is below the earth at night in a feminine sign; a planet in its hayz is 
strengthened 
Hermes: the legendary sage and magician of late classical, medieval, and 
Renaissance legend, also know as Hermes Trismegistus, the Thrice Great 
Hermes, derived from the Egyptian god Djehuti (Thoth). A vast 
dDtawarp 
297 
number of magical, astrological, and divinatory texts were credited to 
him. 
horary astrology: the art of astrological divination, which interprets a chart 
cast for the moment a question is asked in order to answer the question 
humors: in medieval medicine, four subtle fluids, identified with blood, 
phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile, that maintain health when in balance 
and cause illness when out of balance 
imbibition: the alchemical process of pouring a liquid onto a solid so that 
the solid absorbs the liquid 
impedited: in astrological terminology, a planet that is impedited is subject 
to a negative influence from other planets, or is in debility due to its place 
in the signs and houses of the astrological chart, also known as afflicted, 
infortunes, the: in astrology, the planets Saturn and Mars 
ingress: the moment when a planet enters a given sign of the Zodiac, or 
reaches some other specific point in the Zodiac, such as its position at a 
previous time 
intellect: the capacity to know mental realities directly, without the 
intervention of the senses, 
irascible appetite: in medieval psychology, the appetite or irrational drive 
that produces anger; it corresponds to fire and the choleric humor; see 
humors 
litharge: lead monoxide, PbO 
long ascension, signs ofi see oblique ascension, signs of 
lord of the ascendant: the planet ruling the sign ofthe Zodiac rising at a 
particular moment 
lord ofthe house: the planet ruling the sign ofthe Zodiac on the cusp of a 
given astrological house at a particular moment 
lord of the question: the planet ruling the sign ofthe Zodiac on the cusp 
ofthe house governing the purpose of an electional chart or magical 
working at a particular moment, the quesited house, 
luting: fine clay used by alchemists to seal stoppers and lids onto their flasks; 
it was baked hard by the heat ofthe furnace, making a good seal 
malefic: in astrology, negative or unfavorable 
marcasite: crystallized iron pyrite, FeS,. 
melancholy: see black bile 
moveable signs: in astrology, Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn 
nature: see quintessence 
obeying signs: in astrology, the signs of the Zodiac from Libra through 
Pisces 
oblique ascension, signs ofi in astrology, the signs from Cancer through 
Sagittarius 
298 
WattivlLibtt 
Kubetitf GftJttion 
occidental: rising before the Sun or another specified planet 
olibanum: the resin of the Boswellia serrata tree, a close relative ofthe 
frankincense tree, 
oriental: rising after the Sun or another specified planet 
orpiment: arsenic trisulphide (ArSf), an extremely toxic pigment used in 
medieval art. 
oxymel: a mixture of vinegar and honey, much used in medieval medicine 
palm: a measure of length, equal to the width of a human palm 
Part of Fortune: one of the Arabic parts, points on the horoscope 
calculated from the positions of planets and other points; the point of 
fortune is calculated from the Sun, Moon, and the ascendant, and shows 
the location of good fortune in the chart 
phlegm: one ofthe four humors of medieval medicine, associated with the 
element of water 
planets: in medieval astrology, the seven visible bodies that move regularly 
against the background of the fixed stars, the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, 
Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn; the Sun and Moon are occasionally 
distinguished from the planets 
prelates: clergy of high rank, such as Christian bishops or Muslim imams, 
prime form: the first Platonic form or idea, the form ofthe Good, True, 
and Beautiful, which in medieval Platonism was identified with God 
prime matter: the prima materia or original substance from which all other 
substances derive, identified in Picatrix as the substance or body of 
God 
Primum Mobile: in medieval cosmology, the ninth sphere ofthe cosmos, 
which circles around the earth once in 24 hours and imparts movement 
to all the other spheres 
putrefaction: the act of leaving a substance to rot or ferment, one ofthe 
twelve classic alchemical processes 
quadrivium: the four Pythagorean sciences that formed the high school 
subjects of medieval and Renaissance educational theory: arithmetic, 
geometry, music, and astronomy 
qualities: in medieval physics, heat, cold, dryness and moisture, which 
combine to create the four elements 
quintessence: in ancient and medieval cosmology, the fifth element, the 
substance from which the spheres ofthe heavens are made; also called 
"high matter" and "nature" in Picatrix 
racanus: a variety of large green lizard, also known as a lagarius, used in 
some Picatrix confections; we have not been able to identify the species 
reception: in astrology, a relationship between two planets, in which each 
planet is in a sign, term, or face in which the other is dignified 
#lo0uarp 
red azernec: see azernec 
retrograde: in astrology, the apparent movement of a planet in the opposite 
direction from its normal course; the opposite of direct 
revolution of a nativity: a chart cast annually for the time when the sun 
reached the same position as at birth, used to predict the following year 
in the native's life 
sal alkali: impure potassium carbonate, K,CO ( 
sal ammoniac: inpure ammonium chloride, NH4C1 
sarcocolla: a resin from African shrubs ofthe genus Penaea, popular in the 
Middle Ages as incense 
short ascension, signs ofi see direct ascension, signs of 
simple: in medieval medicine, a medicine made from a single herb 
sinister aspect: in astrology, an aspect made when the swifter planet moves 
toward the slower one 
species: a narrowly defined category of things, belonging to one or more 
genera; see genus 
spirit: in medieval physics, vital force, intermediate between consciousness 
and matter 
succeedent houses: in astrology, the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh 
houses of the horoscope 
suffumigation: exposing an object to the smoke of incense, to charge it 
with the magical virtues ofthe incense 
term: in astrology, one of a set of sixty uneven divisions ofthe heavens; 
each term is ruled by a planet 
thurible: an incense burner 
via combusta: in astrology, a section ofthe Zodiac in the signs Libra and 
Scorpio, which has a malefic effect on planets placed in it; Picatrix 
identifies it as the section between 8° Libra and 3° Scorpio, while other 
sources place it between 15° Libra and 15° Scorpio 
virtue: in medieval thought, distinctive excellence and power, rather than 
strictly moral virtue 
vitriol of iron: iron sulphate (FeS0 4), also known as shoemaker's black, 
yellow bile: also known as choler, one ofthe four humors of medieval 
medicine, associated with the element of fire 
?oo 
i[^e PlcatriF-Hltter Knbeu* Litton 
Bibliography 
Agrippa, Henry Cornelius, attrib., Robert Turner, tr., Fourth Book of Occult 
Philosophy (London, 1655). 
Agrippa, Henry Cornelius, Three Books of Occult Philosophy (St. Paul, MN: 
Llewellyn, 1993). 
Agrippa, Henry Cornelius, De Occulta Philosophia Libri Tres, ed. V. Perrone 
Compagni (Leiden, Brill, 1992). 
Albertus Magnus, Book of Minerals, trans. Dorothy Wyckoff (Oxford, 
Clarenden Press, 1967). 
Aviles, Alejandro Garcia "Two Astromagical Manuscripts of Alfonso X" 
Journal ofthe Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, Vol. 59, (1996), pp. 14-23. 
Betz, Hans Dieter, ed., The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1992). 
Bahler, Ingrid and Katherine Gyekenyesi Gatto, ed., The Lapidary of King 
Alfonso X the Learned (New Orleans, University Press of the South, 1997). 
Bonatti, Guido, The Book of Astronomy, Benjamin Dykes, tr. (Golden Valley, 
Cazimi Press, 2007). 
Bruno, Giordano, Cause, Principle and Unity and Essays on Magic (Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press, 1998). 
Chishti, Hakim G.M., The Traditional Healer's Handbook (Rochester, VT: 
Healing Arts Press, 1991). 
Copenhaver, Brian, tr., Hermetica (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1992). 
Couliano, loan, Eros and Magic in the Renaissance (Chicago, University of 
Chicago Press, 1987). 
Cuningham, William, The Cosmographical Glasse (London: John Day, 1559; 
reprinted New York: Da Capo Press, 1968). 
Ebeling, Florian, The Secret History of Hermes Trismegistus (Ithaca, Cornell 
University Press, 2007). 
Evans, James, The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1998). 
Fanger, Claire, ed., Conjuring Spirits (Pennslvania, Pennsylvania State 
University Press, 1998). 
Ficino, Marsilio, Three Books on Life, tr. Carol V. Kaske and John R. Clarke 
(Tempe, AZ: MRTS, 1989). 
Frisvold, Nicholaj de Mattos and Christopher Warnock, tr., The Book of the 
Treasure of Alexander (Iowa City, Renaissance Astrology Press, 2010). 
Gager, John, Curse Tablets and Binding Spells from the Ancient World (New 
York, Oxford University Press, 1992). 
Btbltograpfip 
JOI 
Gerard, John, The Herbal, or General History of Plants (repr. New York: 
Dover, 1975). 
Godwin, Joscelyn, The Pagan Dream of the Renaissance (Grand Rapids, MI: 
Phanes, 2002). 
Harms, Daniel, and John Wisdom Gonce III, The Necronomicon Files (York 
Beach, ME: Weiser, 2003). 
Hartner, Willy, "Notes on picatrix", Isis, Vol. 56, No. 4 (Winter, 1965), pp. 
438-451. 
Klibansky, Raymond, Erwin Panofsky, and Fritz Saxl, Saturn and Melancholy 
(London: Nelson, 1964). 
Lang, Benedek, Unlocked Books (Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania State University 
Press, 2008). 
Lewis, C.S., The Discarded Image (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1970). 
Lilly, William Christian Astrology, (London, 1647). 
Lippincott, Kristen and David Pingree, "Ibn al-Hatim on the Talismans of 
the Lunar Mansions" Journal ofthe Warburg and Coitrtauld Institutes, Vol. 50, 
(1987), pp. 57-81. 
Lovejoy, Arthur O., The Great Chain of Being (New York: Harper and Bros., 
1936). 
Macdonald, Michael-Albion, ed. & tr., De Nigromancia of Roger Bacon 
(Gillette, Heptangle Books, 1988). 
Mathers, S. Liddell Macgregor, The Key of Solomon the King (London, 1889, 
reprinted York Beach, Weiser, 1989). 
Pingree, David, "Some of the Sources ofthe Ghayat al-haklm" Journal ofthe 
Warburgand CourtauldInstitutes, Vol. 43, (1980), pp. 1-15 
Pingree, David, "Between the Ghaya and Picatrix. I: The Spanish Version" 
Journal of the Warburgand Courtauld Institutes, Vol. 44, (1981), pp. 27-56. 
Pingree, David, Picatrix: The Latin Version ofthe Ghayat Al-Hakim (London: 
Warburg Institute, 1986). 
Pingree, David, "Indian Planetary Images and the Tradition of Astral Magic" 
Journal ofthe Warburgand Courtauld Institutes, Vol. 52, (1989), pp. 1-13. 
Plessner, M., "Hermes Trismegistus and Arab Science" Studia Islamica, No. 2 
(1954), pp. 45-59 
Ritter, Helmut, Picatrix (Leipzig: Bibliothek Warburg, 1933). 
Ritter, Helmut, and Martin Plessner, Picatrix, oder die Ziel vom Weisen 
(London: Warburg Institute, 1962). 
Shaw, Gregory, Theurgy and the Soul, the Neoplatonism of Iamblichus 
(Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1995). 
Simek, Rudolf, Heaven and Earth in the Middle Ages: The Physical World 
Before Columbus, tr. Angela Hall (Woodbridge, Suffolk: Boydell Press, 1996). 
JL\)t Vrnttw- iLCber liubciw GSDttion 
Skinner, Stephen and Davii Rankine, tr., The Veritable Key of Solomon 
(Woodbury, Llewellyn, 20G). 
Simon (pseudonym), The hcronomicon (New York: Avon Books, 1980). 
Thabit ibn Qurra, De Imagnibus, tr. Christopher Warnock (Washington, DC: 
Renaissance Astrology, 200). 
Thomann, J. "The Name Pfcatrix: Transcription or Translation?" Journal of the 
Warburg and Courtauld Insitutes, Vol. 53, (1990), pp. 289-296. 
Tillyard, E.M.W., TJje Elizabethan World Picture (New York: Vintage, 1942). 
Turner, Robert, trans., ArsSotoria (Seattle: Trident, 1987). 
Van Bladel, Kevin, The Araiic Hermes (New York, Oxford University Press, 
2009). 
Warnock, Christopher, Secrts of Planetary Magic (Iowa City, Renaissance 
Astrology Press, 2009). 
Warnock, Christopher, TheMansions of the Moon (Iowa City, Renaissance 
Astrology Press, 2007). 
Wright, John Kirtland, The Geographical Lore of the Time of the Crusades (New 
York: American Geographial Society, 1925). 
Yates, Frances, Giordano Br,no and the Hermetic Tradition (London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1964). 
Jitter 
Index 
JO? 
Abenoaxie (ibn Wahshiyyah; also spelled Abenvaxie, Abenvasia, Abenrasia, 
and Abemiaxe), 64, 183, 243, 262, 271 
Abunasar Alfarabi, 83 
Acaym, King of India, 218-9 
Adocentyn (city), 243 
Agrippa, Heinrich Cornelius, 11, 12, 19 
Alchemy, 27, 96, 193, 272-3 
opus animalis, 219, 220 
Alexander, the Great, 76, 139, 218 
Alfonso the Wise, 11,21 
Algeriche (river), 276 
Alhazred, Abdul, 14 
al-Khwarismi, 31, 217 
al-Majriti, 11 
almutaz, 75 
Alraze (Rhazes), 126-7 
Amenus (sage), 152 
amicable numbers, 31, 217 
anger: 
images to cause, 44, 287 
images to remove, 287 
Aristotle, 49, 76, 149, 152, 187, 188, 192, 194-6, 230, 243, 249, 255 
Ashmole, Elias, 11,18 
Astamatis (magical stone), 194-5 
Athabary (sage), 154 
Aydeneruz, King, 197 
Azahabin (Chaldean slaves), 78 
Barnac Elbaramenei (Bartim the Brahman, sage), 182 
batecas, 271-2 
Bayrameni (part of India), 182 
Behentater, King, 217-8 
belief, role in magic, 31, 38 
Benethnays, invocation of, 159-171 
bezoar, 61 
binding tongues, 50-1, 126 
confection for, 204 
images for, 204, 291 
blindness, confection to cause, 214 
?°4 
C&e l^catrte'JUber Jfcubeiw coition 
calcitarat, 240 
Canuiz (country), 182 
Capti (people), 242 
Caraphzebiz (sage), 152 
Caynez (sage), 197 
Centiloquium, 40, 61, 248 
Cerich (river), 275 
cities, images to benefit, 42 
Chaldean Agriculture, see Nabataean Agriculture 
Chaldean(s), 78, 145, 171, 242, 243, 271, 258-9 
colors, recipes for, 140-2 
Corpus Hermeticum, 11 
crops, images to benefit, 47, 292 
cross, magical properties of, 147-8 
deafness, confection to cause, 215 
decans, Hindu images of, 118-120; see also faces 
destruction, images for, 43, 47, 100 
devils, 143-4 
domination, images for, 41, 100 
Egypt, 61, 78, 144,218-9, 243-4 
elixir, 27-8 
Empedocles of Acragas, 230 
enmity, see separation and hostility 
escape, images for, 43 
faces, images of, 63, 113-116, 140-142 
Ficino, Marsilio, 11, 19 
fish, images to catch, 44 
Folopedre, Queen, 280, 281 
Foracen (country), 144 
Forman, Simon, 11 
Galienus (sage), 209 
Gandalf, 13 
Geber (Jabir ibn Hayyam), 127-8, 210-4, 251-2, 267 
geuzahar, 51 
Ghayat al-Hakim, 11 
Gonce, John Wisdom, 15 
Greek(s), 78, 144, 213 
Handemotuz (magical stone), 195-6 
Harms, Daniel, 15 
Harpocrates, 11 
hatred, images for, 51 
3ntw 
hayz, 90 
healing, images for, 44-5, 47, 48, 61-2 
heat, as cause of astrological effects, 66, 92 
Helemetiz (magical stone), 193-4 
Hermes Trismegistus, 120, 140, 150, 153, 176, 180, 209, 243-5 
Hindu(s), 78-80, 83, 124, 145, 217, 219, 258-9 
Hippocrates, 249 
Horazen (country), 276 
humors, four, 67, 81 
Iamblichus, 12 
impotence: 
confections for causing, 203-4, 207 
image for curing, 289 
inability to leave town, confection to cause, 219-10 
India, 12, 61, 144 
initiation of Mars, 180-1 
intelligence(s), 31 
invisibility, confection to cause, 244 
Johannicius (Hunayn ibn Ishaq), 87, 249 
Jupiter: 
correspondences of, 101, 134, 139-40, 154-6, 186 
images of, 102, 106, 111, 139-40 
invocations of, 161-6, 188-9, 241, 293 
suffumigation of, 257 
kings, gaining favor from 
confection for, 202-3 
images for, 41-2 
laurel tree, magical virtues of, 262-3 
Levi, Eliphas, 16 
Lilly, William, 11, 16, 18 
love: 
images for, 39-41, 42, 46, 50, 288, 292 
confections for, 197-202, 205 
Lovejoy, Arthur, 13 
Lovecraft, H.P., 14-15 
Mansions of the Moon, 32-37, 286-293 
Mars: 
correspondences of, 101, 134-5, 139-40, 155, 156-7, 186 
images of, 103, 106-7, 111, 139 
invocations of, 166-9, 189-90, 241, 293 
suffumigation of, 257 
C&e IKcatrto-iLtber Kubeu* Cftrttfon 
materials, of magical images, 85-6, 101 
Mercury: 
correspondences of, 101, 136-7, 139-40, 155, 158, 187 
images of, 104-5, 109-10, 112, 139 
invocations of, 176-188, 191, 242, 293 
suffumigation of, 258 
Merlin, 13, 14 
Mesopotamia, 12 
Mirror of Seven Planets and Seven Winds, 267-8 
Moon: 
correspondences of, 101, 137, 139-40, 155, 158-9 
images of, 105, 110-1, 112, 139 
importance of in magic, 32, 70-1 
invocations of, 178-9, 191-2, 231-40, 242, 293 
phases of, 66-7 
suffumigation of, 258 
muteness, confection to cause, 214-5 
myrtle tree, magical virtues of, 263-4 
Nabataean Agriculture, 29, 183, 184, 262-6, 274-5 
Nabataean(s), 78, 182 
Necronomicon, 14-15 
Nectanebus, 14 
Neoplatonism, 12 
nigromancia, 12-13, 21, 54, 142 
notory art, 135 
Nube (city), 218-9 
Ointment ofthe Sun, 260 
olive pits, magical virtues of, 265 
One, the, 25-6 
Perfect Nature, invocation of, 150-3 
pest control: 
confections for, 268-9, 281-5 
images for, 44, 99 
Pingree, David, 18 
planets, confection ofthe, 259 
Plato, 48, 127, 249,252-3,256 
Pliny, 286 
poisons, 208-9, 216, 267-70, 273 
remedies for, 216-7, 270 
prophecy, 82-3 
Ptolemy, 40, 61, 248 
3nDep 
Pythagoras, 128, 286 
quadrivium, 62, 93-96 
rational spirit, 31-2, 52, 81 
Rayetanz (magical stone), 192-3 
revolution(s), astrological, 80 
Rozuz (sage), 63 
salamander(s), 143 
Saturn: 
correspondences of, 101, 133-4, 139-40, 154, 155-6, 186 
images of, 102, 105-6, 111, 139-40 
invocations of, 159-61, 184-5, 188, 240-1, 293 
spirit of, confection of the, 258 
suffumigation of, 257 
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 16 
Secret of Secrets, The, 245-8 
separation and hostility: 
confections for, 203, 205-7, 215, 271 
images for, 44, 50, 100, 287, 289-90 
Seusdalis (sage), 228 
shapeshifting, confections for, 209-10, 219 
signs, see zodiacal signs 
simples, 84 
sleep, confections for, 207-8, 215-6, 210 
springs, ritual to increase flow, 266 
Sun: 
correspondences of, 101, 135, 139-40, 155, 157, 186-7 
images of, 103, 107, 111-2, 139 
invocations of, 171-4, 183, 190-1, 241, 293 
Ointment of the, 260 
suffumigation of, 257-8 
sunspots, 80 
talismans, defined, 27 
tarantula(s), 280, 284-5 
Thabit ibn Qurra, 49 
Thorndyke, Lynn, 15 
Thoth, 49 
Timachanin (language), 64 
Tintinz (sage), 152 
Tolkien, J.R.R, 13 
trepidation, 77 
Tumtum (sage), 64 
ID&e IPfcattfc-iUber Hubeu* d^ttton 
Upas tree, 274 
Venus: 
correspondences of, 101, 135-6, 139-40, 155, 157-8, 187 
images of, 104, 108-9, 112, 139 
invocations of, 174-6, 191, 242, 293 
suffumigation of, 258 
Via combusta, 39 
wealth, images for, 42, 47 
witchcraft, confections against, 209 
wizard(s), 13-14 
Yetelegehuz (entelechia), 29 
Zeherith (also spelled Zeherit, sage), 184, 264, 268, 271, 274-5 
Zodiacal signs: 
correspondences of, 136-8 
images of, 121-4 
invocations of Moon in, 231-240 
Zucrat (sage) 
The Picatrix 
Liber Rubeus Edition 
The Occult Classic 
Complete in One Volume 
The Picatrix is the most famous 
grimoire of astrological magic and 
one of the most important works of 
medieval and Renaissance magic. With all 
four books complete in one volume, 
translated and annotated by the noted 
scholars, magicians and astrologers John 
Michael Greer and Christopher Warnock, 
Picatrix takes its rightful place as an essential 
occult text for modern esotericists. Picatrix 
is an encyclopedic work with over 300 pages 
of Hermetic magical philosophy, ritual, 
talismanic and natural magic. Greer St 
Warnock's complete translation is clear and 
lucid with numerous annotations. 
A D O C E N T Y N 
P R E S S 
