See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/361114681
Ecological Memory: the spatiotemporal commons of conceptual and physical
navigation
Preprint · February 2022
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.18290.79046
CITATIONS
0
READS
440
1 author:
Andrea Hiott
Universität Heidelberg
1 PUBLICATION   0 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Andrea Hiott on 06 June 2022.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Overview: The basic ideas presented here are: 1.that cognition is continuous with navigation 
(which means navigation itself can be understood as pre-reflective cognition); 2. that taking 
this seriously changes our understanding of landscape in ways that require non-binary 
vocabularies (i.e. using terms like 'mental' and 'physical' as dichotomies is no longer a 
productive strategy); and 3. the orientation and methods of cognitive neuroscience could be 
optimised by an ecological approach which looks at scales of complexity rather than 
stimulus-response and metricizes the experiment itself so it becomes part of the data and 
analysis. 
 
A note on the term 'ecological': Ecological as used here is inspired by many sources, from 
Rachel Carson to Gregory Bateson. At its most general, it implies a stance that, in the words 
of J.J. Gibson on affordance, “cuts across the dichotomy of subjective-objective and helps us 
understand its inadequacy,” (Gibson, 1979, 129). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ecological Memory: 
the spatiotemporal commons of physical and conceptual navigation 
...................... 
 
 
 
 
Master Thesis 
submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
Master of Arts (M.A.) 
in the master’s program „Mind and Brain“  
 
 
 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin 
Berlin School of Mind and Brain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrea Hiott 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Supervisor:  
Prof. Dr. Christian Doeller (Max Planck Institute) 
2. Supervisor:   
Prof. Dr. Georg Northoff (University of Ottawa) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
 
        Page 
Abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Orientation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
What this paper does & clarification of systems 1-3  
4 
Hippocampal-entorhinal formation  
 
 
8 
Cognition as behavior  
 
 
 
          10 
Navigation & memory as continuous terms   
          12 
 
Memory 
 
 
 
 
          12 
 
Representation  
 
 
 
          15 
 
Ecological 
 
 
 
 
          19 
 
Encounter 
 
 
 
 
          21 
 
Time & Space  
 
 
 
          21 
 
Navigation 
 
 
 
 
          23 
An alternative narration of memory research  
          25 
Further refining navigation 
 
 
 
          28 
Towards a process model 
 
 
 
          29 
Current measurements 
 
 
 
          32 
Tolman Eichenbaum Machine 
 
 
          33 
Emphasizing baseline activity  
 
 
          36 
Natural statistics 
 
 
 
 
          39 
Heuristics for reorientation 
 
 
 
          41 
Relevance to navigation and memory  
 
          44 
 
Nestedness 
 
 
 
 
          45 
 
Position 
 
 
 
 
          46 
Possible experiment  
 
 
 
          48 
Clinical potential 
 
 
 
 
          49 
The commons of physical and conceptual navigation          50 
Bibliography  
 
 
 
 
          53 
Abbreviation  
 
 
 
 
          70 
Declaration of authorship 
 
 
 
          71 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
A particular vocabulary is basic to cognitive neuroscience—memory, thought, and 
mind name what scientists hope to understand with their research, while maps, codes 
and representations are sought within brains to explain those activities. Many 
distinguished neuroscientists have recently pointed out that these vocabularies and the 
stimulus-and-task-based methods used to study them require re-evaluation. Still, 
decades of research have produced a successor path—one that begins with thinkers 
such as Edward Tolman and J.J. Gibson in the 1950s and is currently evolving into a 
computational hybrid incorporating dynamical systems. Taking this path requires 
optimizing methods and vocabulary so that behavior and cognition can be 
computationally evaluated as different scales within the same process: Rather than 
speaking of behavior and cognition as separate (i.e. physical & conceptual) this 
approach understands them as scales of nonbinary action, as ecological. Hippocampal 
research relative to navigation and memory offers an example of this reorientation. 
Evaluating memory and navigation as scales of the same process requires shifting the 
weights in current vocabulary. It also means making an ecological shift at the level of 
methods and data analysis. We must metricize the experiment itself and optimize data 
analysis such that scale-free methods can be used to analyse regularities beyond 
subject-object stimulus-response dichotomies. 
 
 
Orientation 
Cognitive neuroscience (CN) continues with measurement as usual though recent scholarship 
portends shifts in assumptions underlying its vocabulary and methods, as well-worn 
dichotomies need challenging (Brette, 2018; Buzsáki, 2020; Hasson et al., 2020). Current 
methods cannot be separated from their concepts: Methods stem from worldview, and 
worldview infuses vocabulary. As György Buzsáki puts it, “the narratives we use to describe 
the world shape the way we design our experiments and interpret what we find” (Buzsáki, 
2019). 
 
 
5 
CN is questioning its narrative. Whether reevaluating fMRI (Poldrack, 2017), challenging 
assumptions behind coding (Brette, 2019; Cisek, 2019b) calling for a cross-disciplinary 
understanding of representation (Baker, 2017; Constant et al., 2021; Kriegeskorte & 
Diedrichsen, 2019) or questioning whether neuroscientists can use microprocessors (Jonas & 
Kording, 2017), the call for clarification is widespread and coming from those who have 
studied these subjects deeply. Buzsáki, for example, has written a book urging the discipline 
towards a dramatic inside-out shift (Buzsáki, 2019) while Uri Hasson has turned towards an 
ecological approach on parameterization (“direct fit”), claiming current “contrived 
experimental manipulations may not provide sufficiently rich behavioral contexts for testing 
our models ” (Hasson et al., 2020). Buzsáki, who recently engaged in a respectful spar with 
David Poeppel on this topic (Buzsáki, 2020; Poeppel & Adolfi, 2020), writes that “the 
general practice in large areas of neuroscience follows a misguided philosophy” (Buzsáki, 
2019). Still, CN may have come further than it thinks. 
 
 
Figure 1: A call for overparameterization from (Hasson et al., 2019) 
 
What this paper does & clarification of Systems 1-3 
This paper sketches out a new philosophy of mind—a way to understand cognition as 
behavior continuous with navigation. The argument here, inspired by (Gibson, 1979; 
Bellmund et al., 2018; Northoff, 2018b; Buzsáki 2019; Hasson et al., 2020) is that the NS 
converts the regularities of the body’s encounter into action, that this action includes all 
traditional cognition, and that by optimizing methods and vocabulary, CN can study 
cognition computationally as scaled behavior. Another, rougher way of saying this is: The 
nervous system (NS) positions the natural statistics it encounters (regardless of whether those 
are internal or external) to its own biogenetic, baseline activity as the body develops and 
evolves through external communication, developing further sensory scales (i.e., via cortex) 
for reading and adjusting discrepancies. This process is best understood, both evolutionarily 
and in current behavior, as navigation. Reorienting cognition as navigation unites it with 
behavior, moving beyond dichotomies towards fresh methods and means of analysis. 
Matching to natural statistics of the encounter is referred to here as System 1 navigation 
while the ability to sense/read bodily regularities created by that matching is referred to as 
System 2. A further term, System 3, is introduced to illustrate communicative measurement 
 
6 
and awareness of System 2, what humans recognize as thinking and memory. System 3 is 
conscious awareness of the activity of mind, both in oneself and in another. 
 
System 1 and System 2 were proposed (Kahneman, 2011; Stanovich & West, 2000) to 
roughly describe two distinguishable modes of thinking or dual processes (Mandler, 1991), 
modes labeled and argued over in numerous ways in philosophy and psychology comparable 
to lower and higher order, phenomenal and access, model-free and model-based etc. (Evans, 
2008). This paper uses System 1 and System 2 as defined below: 
 
• “System 1 operates automatically and quickly, with little or no effort and no sense of 
voluntary control. 
• System 2 allocates attention to the effortful mental activities that demand it, 
including complex computations. The operations of System 2 are often associated with 
the subjective experience of agency, choice, and concentration.” (Kahneman, 2011) 
 
Awareness of what Kahneman describes above as “the subjective experience” is understood 
here as System 3—as the body’s awareness of System 1 and System 2 thinking (whether its 
own or another’s). We can compute, choose, and concentrate without being aware we are 
doing so. Likewise, we can notice another’s agency or effect without noticing that we are 
noticing it. These are understood here as System 2. Knowing that we are doing so—knowing 
that we are computing, choosing, concentrating, or observing our own or another’s agency—
is what is conveyed by phrases like “being conscious” or “watching one’s thoughts” or 
“thinking analytically.” System 3 (which would include Marr’s levels) happens in 
conversation or communication with another or with oneself, whereby there is additional 
sensing of System 2 processes. 
 
Kahneman gives the following examples of System 1 (S1): 
• “Detect that one object is more distant than another. 
• Orient to the source of a sudden sound.  
• Make a ‘disgust face’ when shown a horrible picture” (Kahneman, 2011). 
 
Examples of System 2 (S2) are: 
 
7 
• “Focus on the voice of a particular person in a crowded and noisy room. 
• Look for a woman with white hair. 
• Search memory to identify a surprising sound” (Kahneman, 2011). 
 
Examples of System 3 (S3) would be:  
• Notice one’s own search for a particular woman. 
• Watch oneself search memory for a particular sound.  
• Engage in conversation that critiques one’s previous interaction. 
 
As Kahneman makes clear, these systems are not meant literally but rather as means to 
understand an ongoing, meshed process. To further generalize, these systems can be 
connected to the striatum and caudate (S1), the hippocampal-entorhinal formation and 
retrosplenial cortex (S2), and neocortex (S3). In fact, all systems involve all these areas to 
differing degrees (Chersi & Burgess, 2015; Ciaramelli, 2008; Euston et al., 2012; Vertes, 
2006; Schapiro et al., 2017; Momennejad, 2020; Nitzan et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2021; 
Tzilivaki et al., 2021). Such comparisons seen through current literature, however, can be 
helpful for reference, as the striatum is often associated with root navigation (sequences 
linked to sequences) (Berke, 2009; Schmitzer-Torbert & Redish, 2004), the hippocampal-
entorhinal formation with cognitive maps (readings of regularities), and neocortex 
(prefrontal, etc.) with so-called “conscious” reading or awareness of regularities, critical 
thinking, and communication (Spiers, 2008). Importantly, all systems are associated with 
navigation (Chersi & Burgess, 2015; Spiers, 2008). As this is a lot to take in, here is a brief, 
loose summary:  
The NS and body come with inherited architectures that calibrate to the encounter by 
way of the body’s sensuality. The body, as a sensory system, matches to (Buzsáki, 
2019b), aligns (Northoff, 2018b) or directly fits (Hasson et al., 2020a), regularities of 
its encounter by way of S1, iterating to S3. We can imagine these regularities as 
natural statistics (Giere, 2004a, 2006), and the body’s ongoing encounter as its 
lifespan. As the body learns to navigate regularities (S1), it builds its own regularities, 
and learns to navigate those (S2, S3). This is what is meant by navigation. It includes 
traditional notions of navigation such as movement through environments (i.e. homes, 
cities) but it also includes how a body finds its way through concepts, social relations, 
internet sites, computer tasks, books, etc. For the purposes of this paper, all of this is a 
body’s encounter and that encounter includes the body itself. This encounter, as 
 
8 
explained below, can be of an environment or of one’s habituations to that 
environment—a matter of going to the grocery store, writing a list of what’s needed at 
the grocery store, or remembering an incident that happened there. Navigation is 
whole-body movement and movement (behavior) of the NS through its own 
habituations. (Speaking of NS habits may feel strange. We can also imagine them as 
active priors or active scripts). The regularities of the encounter lead naturally to 
regularities of brain activity as context shifts its regularity; they are generalizable, or 
scales of the same activity. 
 
The hippocampal-entorhinal formation (HEF) is summarized here as a fulcrum, part of 
developing the pacing of striatum nonvoluntary action and cortex-tual readings. Due to space 
and scope, I focus on the HEF as the brain’s GPS (place cells in the hippocampus, grid cells 
in the entorhinal region, etc.) but such navigation should not be read as distinct from striatum 
and other cortex—what is here divided into S1 navigation, S2 reading of habits, and S3 
awareness of bodily navigation is an ongoing process involving all parts to differing degrees. 
Still, traditional literature is used here to show how memory moves into an orientation of 
cognition as continuous with navigation. This is done through re-narrating hippocampal 
research and representation: Hippocampal research can be understood as conjunctive sensing 
and positioning which matches a body to its encounter and which the NS later itself reads as 
habituation. In this way, the paper moves towards a common definition of navigation and 
memory and an example of cognition as scaled wayfinding. The paper proceeds as follows: 
First we develop an understanding of the HEF and research linking navigation and memory, 
then we reorient our definition of memory (which requires reorienting representation), and 
finally, we see how this reorientation allows us to understand cognition as navigation 
whereby navigation is defined as wayfinding via scaled, conjunctive sensing and positioning 
(Gibson, 1979; Gallistel in Eichenbaum, 2017). 
 
Before beginning, a quick note on a common confusion: Because S3 is the system through 
which we become aware of S1 and S2, it is hard not to define our goal through the tools we 
have built—to look for S3 notions of memory and thought in the processes that built them. 
Because the ways we measure and scaffold our senses shape those senses (Hurme, 2017), our 
ability to measure orients us to think through our measurements. These measurements look 
different depending from what position they are measured, and their very ability to be 
measured or communicated implies realism that some process is shared (Massimi, 2018). 
 
9 
This process arranges differently depending on position, just as two boats looking into the 
ocean will necessarily see that ocean at slightly different angles. This processual, perspectival 
view is not new to science (DiSalle, 2006; Giere, 2006) but is new to CN. Due to this 
inclination to use S3 to look towards what created it to find it, it is necessary to note that 
words like memory and thought are perspectival S3 measurements and can only be found to 
the extent one can find an inch or a mile. 
 
 
Hippocampal-Entorhinal Formation (HEF) 
It became clear in the 1950s that two seahorse-shaped areas in the brain known as 
hippocampi are linked to memory (Scoville & Milner, 1957). In the 1970s, it became clear 
that these same areas of the brain are linked to navigation (O’Keefe & Dostrovsky, 1971; 
O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978). In the following decades, the HEF and its positional cells1 (“the 
brain’s GPS”) came to be associated with the cognitive map. The term cognitive map was 
introduced in the 1950s (Tolman, 1948) to describe a systematic means in the brain for 
organizing knowledge across domains (navigating to a reward, inferring a shortcut) and was 
expanded upon (O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978) towards understanding cells in the HEF as firing in 
statistical patterns relative to how a creature moves through its environment. The conjunction 
of sensory and positional information seemed to connect memory and navigation in HEF 
firing (Eichenbaum, 2017a; Eichenbaum & Cohen, 2014; E. I. Moser et al., 2008) which led 
to further insight regarding generalization (Constantinescu et al., 2016; Behrens et al., 2018; 
Bellmund et al., 2018: Theves et al., 2020). This paper reorients towards understanding 
cognitive maps as crucial S3 measurements used to understand how priors develop, how one 
remembers where one has been and how to get there again, and how one infers from those 
priors towards staking out new paths (S1 & S2 navigation). 
 
Figure 2 summary of positional cells and research from (Behrens et al., 2018) 
 
For a time, there was debate about whether hippocampi and cognitive maps were for memory 
(cognition) or for navigation (behavior), reflecting the Cartesian habit, to be discussed later, 
of assuming cognition to be other than action. Scientists have since shown the hippocampus 
is crucial for both memory and navigation (Buzsáki & Moser, 2013; Eichenbaum & Cohen, 
 
1 cells relative to position: i.e., place cells, grid cells, border cells, etc. 
 
10 
1988; Eichenbaum, 2004, 2017a; Milivojevic & Doeller, 2013a; Schiller et al., 2015; 
Eichenbaum & Cohen, 2014), though the invisible hand of dualism remains. Though material 
(physical) navigation and conceptual (mental) navigation have traditionally been treated as 
different domains, they clearly have functions in common (Doeller et al., 2010; Milivojevic 
& Doeller, 2013). In 2017, Eichenbaum went so far as to say that ‘the role of the 
hippocampus in navigation is memory’ (Eichenbaum, 2017b). Knowledge and conceptual 
learning have since been linked to the HEF (Bellmund et al., 2018; Constantinescu et al., 
2016; Eichenbaum, 2017b)—showing the NS likely positions sensory inputs represented by 
S3 as concepts or knowledge in the same way it positions sensory inputs we call rooms or 
landscapes, by relationally weighting clusters of sensory regularities through that 
encountered regularity (J. C. R. Whittington et al., 2020). Such findings suggest we think the 
same way we navigate (Bellmund et al., 2018b), as the NS and body habituate or ‘match’ to 
regularities of the sensory encounter (Buzsáki, 2019). What is sometimes still presented as 
different views of the cognitive map (O’Keefe & Krupic, 2021)—revolving around whether 
these maps are spatial or nonspatial (i.e. behavioral or sensual/conceptual)—assumes 
memory something other than behavior but can be reframed as matters of nested, 
spatiotemporal measurements which differ in scale but not in pattern (Golesorkhi et al., 
2021). In hippocampal literature, for example, audio is termed ‘nonspatial.’ For the NS, 
however, audio is spatial: Although it is not spatial from a whole-body-to-world position, it is 
spatial from the position of the brain and its behavior because the body (rather than the 
world) is its space (Northoff et al., 2020a): space and time are positioned, sensory 
measurements. 
 
Cells in the HEF fire according to environmental regularities (i.e., particular parts of a room) 
(E. I. Moser et al., 2008). For the NS, however, those regularities are not parts of a room but 
regularities of the body’s sensory encounter. In matching to the encounter, the NS is 
matching (Buzsáki, 2019) to the body’s conversion of that encounter (via sight, hearing, 
tasting, proprioception, etc.). One can imagine this as S1 direct fit (Hasson et al., 2020; 
Kahneman, 2011) which then, in a development continuous with the evolution of other 
sensory systems (Schlosser, 2018), develops S2 reading of S1 habits and (perhaps) S3 
communicative awareness of those habits (Heyes, 2018; Kahneman, 2011). In this theory, 
what is sometimes referred to as “controlled hallucination” (Frith, 2005; Seth, 2018) would 
be an S2 reading of S1 habituations as measured by S3, whereby what is encountered is as 
 
11 
much the body’s own habits as it is contextual encounter. As S3, what is being registered is a 
sensory encounter—positioned, spatiotemporal measurement (Northoff, 2018). 
 
 
Cognition as behavior 
In recent years, there has been a push to bring behavior into methods to correct a bias of 
reductionism (Krakauer et al., 2017). Perhaps this can be pushed further to say cognition is 
different scales of behavior. Although philosophical circles argue about whether or not 
cognition is behavior (Aizawa, 2017)—historical precedent nearly forcing a choice 
(Chomsky, 1959)—there have always been options (Tolman, 1922; Gibson, 1966; Gibson, 
1979) which do not separate the two so stringently but measure the subject differently, 
allowing cognition to join walking, talking, or breathing as behavior—as activity of organs, 
systems of organs, or parts of them. One could even define S1 cognition (sensing and 
positioning of that sensing) biologically as an “iterative optimization process to pursue an 
objective, given their input or environment” which is the definition Hasson’s lab gives of 
their Gibson-inspired ‘direct fit’(Hasson et al., 2020). We then understand S1 behavior, 
whether one frames it as navigation or cognition, as developing through exploration of the 
encounter, and S2 behavior developing as a further sensing of those regularities or scripts. 
Similarly, just as Tolman’s notion of a cognitive map is “useful for the animal only after it 
has already learned the significance of the relationships among the landmarks through active 
exploration” (Buzsáki, 2019), inference would not require S3 when whatever position making 
the inference is positioned relative to regularities it has previously explored. Any map of this 
activity would only be visible to an outside observer via S3, though this S3 observer could 
also be that same positioned body. In other words, cognition need not be bodily awareness of 
cognition any more than walking is bodily awareness of walking. Bodily awareness of 
cognition is distinct from the ability of the NS to sense/read its own regularities. 
 
S1 cognition is more akin to the movement described in the Churchland Lab (Russo et al., 
2020) which does not require the NS to read its own activity to move (Russo et al., 2020; 
Zimnik & Churchland, 2021)—one might say the movement here is traditionally ecological 
(Gibson, 1969). This activity could, however, lead to the NS evolving to read the regularity 
of its own integrated sensory conversions—evolving S2 in the same direct fit manner it 
evolved S1, except at a different scale: Whereas for S1, the input is the body’s external 
encounter, for S2, the input is the NS’s habituated behavior. The ability of the NS and body 
 
12 
to sense/read its own previous habituation, once developed, like any other sensory system, 
would not depend on other sensory organs to function, and would exist even if others are 
impaired (Rabinowitch et al., 2016). A body’s awareness of S2 reading (S3) would be an 
ecological development necessitated by its involvement in a larger system. This would mean 
brains are not building models, but observers of bodies with brains are—the body is sensing 
its own multisensory regularities just as those regularities were once sensed by the NS 
through that same body. Bodies, in communication, are sensing their regularities and 
modeling them. 
 
 
Navigation & memory as continuous  
When cognition is understood as activity, navigating external space and navigating concepts 
(behaving and thinking) become scales of the same ongoing activity. Remembering (and 
thinking) are matters of finding one’s way through spatiotemporal sensory regularities such 
as languages, images, or concepts. Current vocabulary sets space as distinct from sensing or 
thinking, however. Cognitive maps are said to exist “for space and other domains” 
(Eichenbaum, 2017b) and words like nonspatial and abstract are used to talk about sensing, 
thinking and remembering. Audio, taste, concepts and so on are termed nonspatial as if the 
NS encountered these differently (Allen et al., 2016; Hampson et al., 1999; O’Keefe & 
Krupic, 2021). This assumes ‘mental’ is opposed to ‘physical’ or behavioral but cognition is 
something the NS does and comes about the same way as other bodily navigation—the so-
called inputs are just from the body rather than into it. 
 
To assume mental and physical are different domains rather than different perspectives of 
behavior is to fall into a Cartesian trap which confuses activity with representation of that 
activity. This leads to problems previously noted (i.e., Buzsáki, 2019): The way vocabulary is 
used in hippocampal research is an example of how assumptions rooted in our use of terms 
restrain us from progress made by this same research. To grasp this shift, however, we must 
re-narrate and observe some basic terms. The following are to be taken as conjecture based 
on combining past research in a new way. Normally, a paper like this must cite anything for it 
to be taken seriously, but those citations are themselves always of previous conjectures based 
on previous assumptions of vocabulary, such that a tower of conjecture is built and forced 
upon those wishing to comment. Some of the following seeks to let that tower fall and see 
what else may have been built from those same resources. 
 
13 
 
Memory 
In current literature, memory is said to be stored and encoded within heads (Michaelian & 
Sutton, 2017; Schapiro et al., 2017). Still, most would not claim memory is a material that 
can be extracted from heads any more than personality is a substance that can be extracted 
from DNA. At its widest, memory is defined as any “modification of an agent’s behavioral 
tendencies as a result of experience” (Michaelian & Sutton, 2017). This could mean 
memories are stored only to the extent actions and behaviors are stored. Bodies do not store 
behaviors in the sense of keeping them intact but rather of habituating them such that they 
can be cued into use according to encountered regularities. Memory is best understood this 
way, too. This does not mean there is no storage: it means storage is a dynamic activity 
whereby cells produce memory the way an orchestra produces music; the same agents and 
instruments create different songs depending upon cue and context. 
 
When we remember, we seem to be sensing again without the presence of the objects that set 
those parameters (Luczak et al., 2007): our body uses priors via action not via retrieval, just 
as it does when it senses light or sound. Our senses have evolved for action (Schlosser, 2018; 
Smetacek & Mechsner, 2004) and our ability to sense our cognition is continuous with this 
development. The tricky thing is that priors can come from the body itself once that body’s 
cognitive habits have been framed by the encounter. We remember our grandmother, for 
example, because we are thinking of the test we have on Friday and see the date, which is 
also her birthday. All cues are associative: these paths are cognition (Ginsburg & Jablonka, 
2019). The encounter never stops, nor does the body’s sensing of it; it is never wholly inside 
or out. 
 
Most would not object to defining memory and storage as activity. Others explain words like 
encoding or storage as metaphorical (Roediger, 1980). Even if used loosely, however, these 
words come with assumptions that guide how experiments are created and whether those 
experiments are deemed successful. Just as the Euclidean, spatial notion of cognitive maps 
needs updating (Momennejad, 2020), assumptions behind storage do too. Understanding 
memories as things stored in brains rather than behaviors weighted by cue frames the 
paradigm towards substance rather than process and stifles progress (M. H. Bickhard, 2009). 
 
 
14 
To unpack these claims, let’s look at a lengthy quote (Eichenbaum, 2017a) which articulates 
important history regarding navigation, memory and the hippocampus, demonstrating 
standard vocabulary. In this quote, memory is assumed to exist as a substance in space, but 
that space is defined as different from physical space. It sits snug within the tradition which 
defines memory, thought, concepts, knowledge, smells, tastes and sounds as nonspatial (E. I. 
Moser et al., 2008; O’Keefe & Krupic, 2021; Wu et al., 2020) or attributing them 
instrumentally to conceptual space (Gärdenfors, 2000). Are these nonspatial from an NS 
point of view? It seems unlikely, as from a neural position within the NS, these would have 
their own spatiotemporal dynamics (Dotson & Yartsev, 2021; Northoff et al., 2020b). In fact, 
the points made below become stronger if we understand memory as behavior, and concepts 
and knowledge as different statistical sensory regularities read by the NS the same way they 
are read by the sensory body when it’s moving through (for example) a maze. To assume 
Cartesian non-spatiality (Descartes, 1993) is to confuse representations of activity (smells, 
tastes, etc.) with the activity they measure. Now, to Eichenbaum: 
 
Some have suggested that the hippocampus evolved to map space and support 
navigation and that these functions were co-opted during evolution to also support the 
organization and navigation of abstract spaces in memory. For example, O’Keefe and 
Nadel (1978) viewed the rodent hippocampus as dedicated to mapping physical space; 
they allowed that the human left hemisphere evolved to map semantic space. Buzsáki 
and Moser (2013) raised a similar argument, suggesting that the hippocampus and 
closely associated areas originally evolved as a dedicated spatial navigational system, 
but in humans was co-opted to support a broader role in mapping memories. They 
specifically emphasized that the form of representation originally developed to 
represent routes was the basis for later evolution of the ability to remember the flow 
of events in episodic memory. They also argued that the form of representation used 
in the creation of cognitive maps was the basis for later evolution of the ability to 
represent structured conceptual organizations in semantic memory…there is 
substantial evidence the hippocampus is essential to creating cognitive maps of 
physical and abstract space in nonprimates, including birds (Lazareva et al. 2015) as 
well as rats (Bunsey and Eichenbaum 1996) and mice (Devito et al. 2010), indicating 
a general role in cognitive mapping across spatial and nonspatial domains among 
diverse mammalian species…These findings challenge the idea that navigation 
preceded relational memory in evolutionary appearance (Eichenbaum, 2017a). 
 
15 
 
Eichenbaum’s quote assumes ‘space’ in memory, and memory to be a substance stored, yet 
also asserts memory is nonspatial. His point is stronger if memory is defined as habitually 
evoked behavior. Evoked by what? By encountered sensory regularities, even when those 
regularities belong to the body reading them. This allows for conjunction of memory and 
navigation in the way Eichenbaum shows conjunction of sensing and positioning. It means 
seeing the brain as an organ of action (Hasson et al., 2020), no longer defining 
“understanding” through a Cartesian prism of non-spatiality and non-extension. 
 
What if S3 words like space and memory are communicative measurements of ongoing 
activity? We could understand the activity it measures to be as spatial as any other from the 
perspective of the NS (Northoff et al., 2020a). This means searching for what Brette calls 
hieroglyphs within brains is helpful to the extent that we know from the start that those 
hieroglyphs are communicative measurements of observed activity (Brette, 2018). It makes 
sense to represent (via fMRI images, models, etc.) regularities of activity and how they 
change in conditions of disease. Representing those activities externally to communicate 
about them is how science proceeds. Looking for representations inside of brains, however, is 
like looking into the ocean for replicas of the boat one is standing upon. 
 
If we take maps out of brains and see them as measurements, concept space and physical 
space become, for the NS, scaled activity of positioned sensing. Navigation is sensory 
behavior; thinking and remembering are versions of it. For the NS, moving down the street 
and moving through a book are matters of positioning encountered sensory relations. 
Positioning them to what? To one another and all previously encountered. Positioned where? 
In the weights of the interaction, in the way the body and brain ecologically encounter 
whatever is encountered, even when that encounter is the body itself. This underlines 
Eichenbaum’s point that navigation did not precede memory, though it also means memory 
did not precede navigation: To move is to sense, and one cannot sense without being moved. 
 
Representation 
Debate flares over whether representations are real and/or internal (Constant et al., 2021; 
Baker, 2017). The view expressed here is that representations are real and are not inside 
brains; they are communicative measurements of systematic activity. This is a different take 
on philosophical dichotomies of realism and anti-realism about representations (Appiah, 
 
16 
1991) because such dichotomizing is not necessary via an ecological and perspectival stance. 
Theories and models are part of the same statistical regularities they theorize about or model, 
so there is no gap, only different positions (Giere, 2006; Massimi, 2018). As we will see 
below, space and time can be understood through a similar shift (DiSalle, 2006; Giere, 2004), 
as measurements made from positions. We can only approximate activity with measurements 
because measurements are themselves part of the ongoing shared regularities—as are we: To 
communicate implies shared activity, regardless of whether one defines what is shared as 
language, space, time, virtuality, illusion, etc. There are no gaps between positions because 
those gaps would also be positions: From any position, one can turn the kaleidoscope of scale 
(i.e. from social to human to cellular). Likewise, just as activity measured as time and space 
is not distinct from what measures it (Baumann et al., 2016; Ciaglia et al., 2020), an S3 
observation (measurement) cannot be extracted from S1 and S2 because the activity of those 
systems is it. It is only through representations (language, numbers, etc.) that we can 
communicate about regularities (we can communicate without representations, but we need 
representations to communicate about regularities). Here, as discussed earlier, is where it 
becomes easy to confuse S3 measurements with what is being measured, to look for language 
or numbers or figures inside of brains simply because their natural statistics shape and form 
our sensory experience of them. While it may seem like we have words and images in our 
heads, they are not in heads but are sensed by them. The difference is subtle but momentous. 
 
Turing’s machine models how sequences of symbols on a strip of tape can be ‘read’ and new 
ones ‘written’ so long as there are a few basic rules by which the sequencing of that model 
operates (Church, 1937; Turing, 1937; Wells, 2004). Reading and writing (words which only 
make sense for an S3 observer) are, for the thing doing the reading or writing, a matter of 
matching, aligning, or directly fitting to what the body has converted from its sensory 
systems to the NS, or of the integrated habits that same NS makes through its matching 
(Wells, 2002, 2004). Taking representations out of the head makes models and computation 
in this Turing tradition more important, not less. A representation (code, map) needs (at least) 
two points to be made by a third (Bateson, 1972). It is only through (at least this) 
triangulation that further sensory organization forms. Bodies represent to communicate with 
one another or with themselves. What they are communicating about are regularities, natural 
statistics shared at least enough to be observed and communicated— discerned statistical 
regularities shifting according to position of measurement, from the point of view measuring 
 
17 
it. Likewise, representations such as fMRI or EEG data are not observed in brains but are S3 
measurements of highly regular brain activity. As Buzsáki writes: 
Judgments of “similar” or “different” are subjective (i.e., observer-dependent). Yes, 
an experimenter can quantitatively define the relationship between stimuli and the 
spatiotemporal firing patterns of recorded neurons…this relationship does not mean 
that neurons in the brain of the experimental subject views the stimuli in the same 
way as the experimenter, nor does it mean that the brain uses these recorded signals in 
the same way or at all. (Buzsáki, 2019). 
 
Representations (words, images, models) are themselves co-created sensory clusters humans 
form to better understand their activity. fMRI images are cropped snapshots of activity 
happening when a person looks at a particular statistically regular image in an fMRI machine 
(i.e., scary is a statistical regularity). As Buzsáki points out, the resulting brain image is 
relevant to the position viewing it, not to the brain of the subject (Buzsáki, 2020). It does not 
represent the brain it is a picture of; it represents the relation of that brain to the experimenter 
and experiment. It correlates a general measurement (the task) to S3 measurement. This 
shows the brain has regular statistics of activity when sensory stimulation is of regular 
statistics (as in a controlled task). The maps between those statistics are external 
measurements, observed from a point of view looking for specific regularities. Why does this 
distinction matter? Because it guides methods, theories and vocabularies and keeps CN 
trapped in dichotomies rather than seeing how patterns scale between positions. To do this, 
one must understand memory as an S3 measurement of activity from a vantage point. As 
Romain Brette writes, neural code “often spans both the experimental apparatus and the 
brain” and is “information only by reference to something with a known meaning, which is 
not the kind of information relevant for a perceptual system” (Brette, 2019). The response of 
the brain does not represent intrinsically, it is measured as representation by whatever point 
of view is measuring it, even when they use tools to do so (Buzsáki, 2019).  
 
The strange loop of the human body is that it can also measure itself, and that in sensing the 
representations it creates, it also has its sensory experience molded by those representations 
(i.e., languages and images). This can lead to humans correlating representations (such as 
images they make of brain activity) with words they create in representational systems (like 
memory) or confusing measurements of activity with that activity itself, as is done when 
models or representations are claimed to be in heads (Giere, 2004; Hawkins et al., 2018). 
 
18 
Comparing a term like “memory” to a freezeframe of brain activity is comparing two external 
representations, as the logical positivists were doing in comparing language and math 
(DiSalle, 2006). Saying the brain builds models confuses the brain with bodies that use brains 
to build models to communicate about brains. A body using its brain is different than the 
brain building a model for itself, just as a body using its lungs is different from a lung 
building a model of itself. The brain does not need a model of the world when it has the 
world itself, nor does it need a model of its own regularities when it has those regularities. 
Only bodies communicating about regularities need models of them. A Turing machine is not 
communicating when it reads (S2) but an observer is communicating when it observes that 
reading (S3). 
 
Using representations to measure cognitive habits, even when that means comparing 
representations, is helpful for communication, just as using miles or kilometers to measure 
movement over land is helpful. Representations such as codes and maps lead towards better 
measurements in the same way standardized metrics have proven better than measuring with 
hands or footsteps. Miles and kilometers are not in the landscape, yet as communicative of 
regularities, they tell us a great deal about that landscape relative to our position in it and help 
us find our way, as do fMRI images and EEG readings. These measure ongoing, dynamic 
activities in brains but those measurements are not in brains, even if whole-body 
consciousness of mind makes it feel as if they are. 
 
Representations add a flexible layer of shared sensory statistics to the statistical regularities 
of ecologies so they can be communicated about and better navigated. The structure of those 
representations also influences how those bodies communicate. When I remember my 
childhood dog, I am measuring my current encounter to all I have encountered before and 
doing so through representations which are themselves part of the sensory regularities which 
my body registers to shape active, multisensory integrations via S1 and S2. The S3 
measurement I’m making is an activity of sensing which uses representations created beyond 
me: it is a matter of whole-body communication, even if only with myself. Again we have (at 
least) triangulation: Observation requires positioning of the ongoing encounter and sensory 
conjunctions from my supervision of my position, the active history of that position, and the 
shared representation through which I ecologically order both (Gibson, 1966). The ecological 
interaction is the shared encounter, and measurement brackets recurring statistical regularities 
(representations) of that ecological interaction (seemingly containing it) to communicate. At 
 
19 
no time do I need a representation of a dog in my head, any more than I need a representation 
of a banana in my nose to smell a banana. My nervous system is not using a model or 
representation—it is ecologically sensing or reading other actions; it is only from a place of 
observation that these are models or representations.  
 
Sensing a banana may result in similar cellular activity in my nose each time I am presented 
with a different banana, just as walking down a street in Berlin requires similar activity in my 
body as walking down a street in NYC. To confuse similar bodily behavior (either internal or 
external) with a representation of its cue is not helpful. If, for example, we caricature S2 as 
prefrontal cortex reading HEF activity, there is no need for cortex to represent the activity it 
is reading; rather, the activity itself shifts weights according to the natural statistics of the 
encounter. If I am walking the street in Berlin, for example, those statistics may overlap 
considerably with the activity of walking the street in NYC but there will also be many 
contextual sensory differences that ecologically cue differences in my own regularities. None 
of this needs to be represented in the body because it is in the environment. Likewise, as we 
will see below, any measurement of this bodily activity is only helpful if it can be statistically 
compared to the environment not to another measurement of bodily activity on a different 
street. 
 
Our bodies and brains sense/read S1 habits that those same bodies and brains build. This 
building may be a matter of bodily regularities being weighted and positioned by the 
hippocampus in terms of striatum and cortex-tual habituations. The body, by way of S3 
interaction with other bodies, becomes aware of itself as a subject and, in so doing, evolves to 
observe and measure its own activity. An important distinction arises: Mind (bodily 
navigation) and consciousness (sensory capacity) are not the same. Consciousness is a 
measurement of the overall bodily state of sensory capacity. Mind is the activity of 
positioning sensory regularities to navigate. Through S3, consciousness becomes aware of 
mind, and of consciousness.2 
 
Ecological 
 
2 Probably Grossberg’s more spectrum like understanding of consciousness via ART would be a better way of 
understanding this, alongside the simple Glasgow scale. 
 
20 
Gibson wrote that “perception of what a thing is and the perception of what it means are not 
separate…they are ecological...” (Gibson, 1966) and coined affordance as an activity that 
“cuts across the dichotomy of subjective-objective and helps us to understand its 
inadequacy.” An affordance, he wrote, is both “physical and psychical, yet neither” (Gibson, 
1979). He developed this view partly out of dismay at how the study of cognition had become 
a binary struggle between behaviourism and cognitivism. An ecological view allows us to see 
these as different scales of the measurement of regularities. 
 
We share more of the statistics we encounter than we do not, otherwise there would be no 
commons to navigate (Barlow, 2001). Importantly, as we notice divergences, we become 
aware of shared parameters, and this infuses those parameters with potential. Divergences, 
both positive and negative, evolve communication because they force us to find better ways 
to communicate. There is more to life than any one position can sense and no more than all 
positions sense: Life senses itself from a position as life while at the same time sustaining the 
life of other positions to stay alive (D. Hofstadter, 2007). This cycle of sensing and 
positioning is what is referred to here as navigation and can be a matter of finding one’s way 
through cities, texts, ideas, video games, etc. It cannot be wholly located in any position, 
neither in subject or object, body or environment. 
 
Regardless how real or unreal one believes anything to be—call it all virtual, conscious, 
etc.—for the purposes of this paper all one needs to allow is that to measure or observe 
requires a sensory position, that measurements are matters of regularities, and that 
communication between positions about those regularities can occur. Whatever it is that is 
regular (real, virtual, or otherwise) is what this paper refers to as ecological. A human body, 
if we take that position, is part of an ongoing ecological encounter from birth to death, the 
very architecture that is the body cannot be separated from its sensing and positioning. The 
ecological is the ongoing, unbroken activity necessary for that activity’s continuance as 
observed from a particular point. This shares part of basic ideas of complex life cycles 
(Wilbur, 1980), principles of ecology in studies of molecular evolution (Putman & Wratten, 
1983; Quammen, 2018), research showing mind as bodily activity continuous with life 
(Thompson, 2007; Varela et al., 1991), cognition as active engagement whereby meaning 
clarifies in use (Hutto, 2017; Northoff, 2016b; Ryan & Gallagher, 2020; Wittgenstein, 1953), 
and perception and action as inseparable, ongoing dynamical systems (Bateson, 1972; 
Charles, 2012; Gibson, 1966). 
 
21 
 
Both Gibson and Tolman set about building nonbinary bridges in the 1950s, but 
representation is no longer confined to Tolman’s version of the cognitive map and ecological 
is not confined to anti-representational Gibsonian frameworks (Read et al., 2020). Taking an 
ecological stance as used here means taking a conjunctive, systems-based approach that 
depends upon computation (Eichenbaum, 2017; Whittington et al., 2020; Hasson et al., 
2020). Computation is necessary precisely because the brain, body and world must be studied 
as scales within the same active process. Computation is necessary to develop ecological 
methods and means of analysis. 
 
Encounter 
Encounter, a word used often here, means a position’s nonstop ongoing sensing of the 
ecological as defined above, which includes its sensing of itself. Encounter is used to avoid 
words like stimulus and input when possible because those words suggest the body is sensing 
one thing or that the body’s awareness of its sensing is the same as its sensing, but any 
position is always attentive of less than the body is sensing (Drew et al., 2013; Nakajima et 
al., 2019; Wimmer et al., 2015). In addition, parameters of stimulus or input are usually 
decided by an observer, but the body is always sensing (no matter its awareness of that 
sensing), even in an experiment; this totality for the body is expressed as the encounter, 
which is continuous and unbroken from birth to death regardless of designated stimulus. 
 
Time & space 
There are dual arguments in philosophy and science about what space and time are and how 
to understand them (Arthur, 1994). Both “absolute vs. relational” (i.e., Newton vs. Leibniz) 
and “objective vs. subjective” (i.e., Bergson vs. Einstein) are worthy ways of doing 
measurement; what matters are their results. As Newton understood and was made obvious 
by Einstein, space and time (however defined) are always from a position (DiSalle, 2006a). 
Like velocity, they are not properties of an object but positioned measurements. Space and 
time, like velocity, depend on the position measuring. Kant also noticed this, writing that “our 
knowledge of space is inseparable from our means of representing it to ourselves in 
experience” (DiSalle, 2006). In other words, “exploratory experience is not a passive 
representation or perception of space but a construction of relationships“ (Buzsáki & Llinás, 
2017), an active measurement:  
 
22 
In classical physics, the ‘theater’ or ‘container’ metaphor of space and time 
determines the exact location and speed of a particle. Distance and duration are 
equated via velocity. Research in neuroscience continues to be performed within this 
framework of classical physics (4), even though in contemporary physics ‘there is no 
longer space which ‘contains’ the world, and there is no time ‘in which’ events occur, 
(Buzsáki & Llinás, 2017). 
 
Oddly, the same body (position) can have different perspectives, one position of 
measurement can be shared among bodies (as with standardized metrics), and a perspective 
can measure from a position different from its own. In The Monadology, Leibniz offers a way 
to understand how points of view can overlap and shift (Rescher, 1991). Tweaking this, the 
physicist Lee Smolin suggests that Leibniz’s monad might be point of view—taking Leibniz 
as literally as possible to see a monad not as a substance but as what Daniel Dennett calls a 
stance (Dennett, 1987), even better understood as position, since one need not stand to have 
one. For Smolin, there is no ‘outside’; all is a matter of relations of events (Smolin, 2018). 
We use the ecological the same way a fish uses water. If space is understood as 
measurements of relations, the monad is a position in that relation, a point from which the 
ongoing activity can be measured or viewed. Self is always a representation because it is 
always a position’s measurement, a perspective (Llinás, 2001; Wolff et al., 2019). 
 
This reorients what is meant by temporal and spatial. They are no longer positions in a 
container but positions in an encounter. Just as populations of neurons do not have to be near 
one another to fire at the same time to be coded as a population (Buzsáki, 2006, 2019), space 
and time are measurements that can be taken from multiple dimensions or positions of 
relation. Spatiotemporality is continuous, but its patterns differentiate according to the 
position taking the measurement; the encounter is continuous even if the measurements are 
discrete. This means we can observe statistical regularities of continuous patterns (activities) 
as they evolve and translate, and our representations of them are not what they measure but 
its measurement. Understanding cognition as continuous with navigation means 
understanding as sensemaking of the ongoing encounter as part of that encounter (Weick, 
1995). Space and time measure how those positions change ecologically; this transcendence 
of bodily position is a capability of S3. 
 
 
23 
To reiterate, the human body is part of a 360-degree nonstop ecological encounter. The 
encounter is whatever can be sensed—people, cities, homes, conversations, books, thoughts, 
relationships, waves, gravity, spikes, etc.—themselves designated by their continuous sensory 
statistics as positioned to all that has been previously encountered. For the brain, the 
encounter is the body’s translation (sensuality) of this ongoing encounter. Regularities are 
measured by humans as time and space. 
 
 
Navigation 
As the body matches and adjusts to the statistical regularities of the encounter, senses sharpen 
and activities such as breathing, walking, talking, hearing, vision, remembering, and thinking 
clarify. The encounter has highly stable statistics (Barlow, 2001; J. C. R. Whittington et al., 
2020); the sensory body aligns with (Northoff, 2018b), matches to (Buzsáki, 2019) or fits 
directly to (Hasson et al., 2020) that regularity as S1 navigation. Developing to sense that 
habituation (via corollary discharge, etc.) is S2. The body’s development, through 
communication, to read its own cognitive habituations (results of S1 and S2) comes as S3. 
This delineation of navigation and cognition works for any landscape be it material or 
conceptual. For the NS, the difference between navigating a room or navigating a language is 
the sensory information being converted by the body (sight, hearing, proprioception, etc.)—
‘sensory positioning’ within an ongoing encounter. 
 
In current vocabulary, however, we say there are representations of features and 
representations of conjunctions (flexible or not) stored in the brain (Kiefer & Pulvermüller, 
2012; Kriegeskorte & Diedrichsen, 2019): Neuroscientists look for what parts of the brain are 
active for features like colors or shapes, or for conjunctions of those features like objects, and 
call these representations. This is problematic because it suggests there is some pattern that 
begins and ends relative to some feature or conjunction, but brain activity normally does not 
begin or end except once in a lifespan, accessing stimuli only via conversions of ongoing 
sensuality. No doubt, after parameters are controlled, we can and do designate features and 
correlate them to regularities of brain activity, but how helpful is this without measuring 
those features? 
 
Because we look for brain representations, we design experiments and methods towards 
them. It is more likely, however, to find regularity of bodily/NS behavior according to the 
 
24 
statistics of a full encounter rather than snapshots of reliable activity that correspond to 
unmeasured stimuli. There is ample evidence for this in behavior such as the success of 
artificial limbs and cochlear implants (Marks & Michael, 2001; Ortiz-Catalan et al., 2020; B. 
Wilson et al., 1997). Such technologies do not use representations but rather samplings of 
ongoing rhythms and function. There are no beginnings or ends to NS and bodily activity and 
while there are regularities, looking for patterns that correlate to an unmeasured stimulus3 to 
tell us something about memory may be less helpful than noticing rhythms of activity specific 
to the statistics of that encounter. The body, even in the most stringent experimental 
conditions, is immersed in a full sensory encounter that does not need brain patterns for 
single stimuli but rather an ongoing dynamical harmony, a full dynamic gestalt that changes 
in statistical patterns of sensory regularities but never starts or stops. 
 
The brain habituates like any other organ, working in response to the body’s ongoing sensory 
encounter. The statistical regularities of this encounter allow for direct inference, as 
exemplified in Tolman’s rats (Tolman, 1948). Habituation and sensing of regularities 
generalize to the scale of brain behavior, to bodily behavior, and to that of groups. Maps are 
made when we measure regularities from a position. Such statistics build upon statistical 
activity aligning with, matching to, or directly fitting the statistical regularity of the 
encounter. A body, in learning to navigate, does not need features unless it needs to 
communicate. Features are measurements (robust statistical regularities) for communication, 
and as of now, are not metricized. An S3 representation (i.e. a designated feature) 
communicates regularity but will always be imprecise without metrics. 
 
A creature senses the world through its previous experience, ecologically adjusting its 
ongoing position in the encounter’s statistical regularity, a part of which is its own. The 
creature’s position (its body, all it’s experienced) is important because that position, as 
activity, has been molded by all previous encounters, much like a forest path or riverbed 
takes its shape from what has moved through it. Tolman’s cognitive maps moved towards 
uniting cognition as behavior in an inside-outside-in framework that contrasts with the more 
accepted trial-and-error “instrumental response” (Buzsáki, 2019)—already suggesting 
habitual, regularized activity within the nervous system matching statistical sensory 
regularities of the encounter. The rat’s body could ecologically weight regularities of the 
 
3 Words are also measurements. Here, I mean measurement with numerical metrics. 
 
25 
encounter due to its own position as part of that encounter, linking navigation and behavioral 
associative learning (Birch et al., 2020). Rats learn without words or pictures, but if creatures 
develop ways to represent (communicate) about regularities, they can become aware of them 
(S3), extending navigation towards Unlimited Associative Learning (Birch et al., 2020), as 
humans do with languages, images and other forms they create and learn through. For 
Tolman’s rats, so long as the sensory statistics of the maze have been encountered in their 
regularity, the rat’s bodily position itself, as part of those statistics, ecologically inhabits a 
unique position in the encounter it navigates. Further sensing of those statistics allows 
another level of inference (S2) experienced by humans as memory or thought once it comes 
to awareness via S3. Communication adds a representational layer to agency. 
 
Each child is born into an ongoing encounter full of beings that communicate through 
representations (language, images, etc.). Part of navigation is navigation of these 
representational statistics—the statistics of socially created communication. The brain 
integrates and positions sensory information; it also reads those integrations. We create 
drawings, films, artworks, books, apps, codes, maps, etc. to help us piece together and 
transmit these cognitive gadgets (Heyes, 2018). In other words, we create new 
representations via S3 which model our experience of ongoing activity but also shape that 
activity in regular ways that can be observed and represented. This is the same activity that 
happens when we use a map to navigate cities or when we draw a new map. These can be 
understood as scaled connections between positions of the encounter made ecologically by 
weighting patterns built of previous encountering—i.e., conceptual path integration. 
 
 
An alternative narration of memory research  
Ebbinghaus showed how prior experience, context, repetition and duration determine what 
can be explicitly recalled (Ebbinghaus, 2013)—how the NS and body habituate to the 
encounter through positioning regularities encountered via sensing. Behaviorists extended 
this path to create a program of learning based on cues (sequences of weighted sensory 
positions) to observe relationships between the encounter and its recall (Tolman, 1922). It 
also became clear the hippocampus is important for situating new aspects of the encounter 
with all previously encountered: Pioneers such as Lashley and Penfield saw that lesions 
affected one’s ability to position previously-experienced habits (the body’s ongoing activity) 
to the current sensory encounter, both behaviorally (material navigation) and conceptually 
 
26 
(representational navigation) (Penfield, 1952). Around this same time, Hebb postulated that 
learning (habituating sensory regularities in the encounter) strengthened firing proclivities 
between neurons during activities (LTP); certain patterns weight positionally towards others, 
such that particular weights are more likely to trigger particular connective scripts, adjusting 
overlap between a consistent encounter and ongoing baseline activity (Hebb, 1949; Langille 
& Brown, 2018) and allowing for quick systematic change (Tse et al., 2007). 
  
In 1957, Milner and Scoville showed bilateral removal of the hippocampus and MTL in H.M. 
induced severe, specific cognitive impairment, the inability to link the current encounter to 
what had been encountered previously, which meant an inability to take the encounter 
personally (Scoville & Milner, 1957). Copious research on H.M. (Squire, 2009), study of 
others with similar lesions, and animal research (Vorhees & Williams, 2014), confirmed and 
reconfirmed the HEF as essential to a person’s ability to position current cues of the 
encounter to previous navigating of the encounter by adding or adjusting weights 
accumulated through ongoing regularities; HEF is essential to active positioning of sensory 
data, what S3 experiences as remembering and thinking. 
 
Figure 3: Navigation and memory are sequences, successions of events from a position, is how I read Figure 3 above from 
(Buzsáki & Llinás, 2017). 
 
In the 1970s, this same part of the brain was understood as necessary for navigation. 
Scientists found ways to record neurons in creatures as they moved through a determined 
space (Ranck, 1973). O’Keefe and Dostrovsky discovered cells in the hippocampus fire 
regularly when an animal is in a particular sensory space (O’Keefe & Dostrovsky, 1971); 
Ranck found cells corresponding to head direction (Taube et al., 1990). It soon became clear 
that O’Keefe’s place cells had different firing fields—unique hippocampal activity as the 
animal moved through regularized sensory positions. O’Keefe and Nadal linked this to 
Tolman’s work, designating the hippocampus a cognitive map, their S3 modeling of 
systematic firing relative to the natural statistics experienced sensorily by the body from the 
position of the brain. 
 
O’Keefe’s postdocs Bruce McNaughton and Carol Barnes soon linked hippocampi firing 
regularities to navigational situations (Mcnaughton et al., 1996; McNaughton et al., 2006). 
Much of their work and others (Eichenbaum, 2004; Gallistel, 1990; Kubie et al., 2020; Kubie 
 
27 
& Muller, 1991; Muller & Kubie, 1987; O’Keefe & Burgess, 1996) reframes (Buzsáki, 2019) 
in support of cognition as navigation, meaning hippocampal cells are not firing for 
coordinates in the environment but rather for the overall body’s sensuality relative to the 
natural statistics of the encounter, relative to all previously sensed. This fits with the primacy 
of action in navigation—that firing frequency can depend on speed, that place fields in a 
journey in one direction are often different on the return. It also fits the path integration 
system McNaughton and Barnes postulated as “a body cues feedback-supported guiding 
mechanism, based on information from local visual and somatosensory cues, proprioceptive 
feedback from the body (e.g., muscles, tendons), the number of steps taken, vestibular input 
(translational and rotational head accelerations), and, likely, corollary discharge from self-
motion activity…” (Buzsáki, 2019). 
 
Later, the Mosers found and named grid cells in the entorhinal cortex that fire at regular 
intervals during navigation of defined sensory positions (Hafting et al., 2005). An extended 
family of positional cells has since been observed and named (boundary, time, etc.) in the 
HEF, all firing with regularities that correspond to changes in sensory statistics of the 
encounter as experienced ecologically. Proprioception, head direction, and other such bodily 
actions are themselves sensual (Buzsáki, 2019). Challenges of path integration (how a 
creature navigates a place it has never been) melt away once we understand that it is not the 
place being navigated that allows the brain’s GPS to produce adequate bodily behavior but 
rather the overall natural statistics of that encounter in relation to all previous experience—
the overall variations are slight, just as one can be in Paris or New York and still, for the most 
part, experience the same overall natural statistics of a city (streets, buildings, etc.). 
 
If we understand the HEF as positioning natural sensory statistics, we see how the encounter 
is not limited to traditional landscapes but includes virtual or representational ones (images, 
words, intranets, computer tasks, etc.): For the NS, those are also matters of natural sensory 
statistics. Eichenbaum began clarifying this by asserting that navigation is relational 
memory—multidirectional, nested conjunctions of sensory input and location (J. C. R. 
Whittington et al., 2020). This same conjunctive formula generalizes whether one is 
navigating a room or navigating images and concepts (Constantinescu et al., 2016; 
Eichenbaum, 2017b). Categories and concepts are themselves made up of, or grounded in, 
what is experienced by the body as sensory statistics, with metaphors illuminating the 
connection of those concepts to sensorimotor experience of navigation (Barsalou, 2010; 
 
28 
Kirmayer et al., 2020; Lakoff et al., 1980; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999). There is extensive 
research linking the hippocampus to language. Though this is not yet part of the common 
narrative, language may itself be a matter of the conjunction Eichenbaum describes as 
navigation and memory (Duff & Brown-Schmidt, 2012; Kurczek et al., 2013; MacKay et al., 
1998), a matter of sensing and positioning regularities in the form of sounds and characters 
which enter the body sensually (by sight, sound, etc.) and position according to their likeness 
to one another in context.  
 
What we are left with is the understanding that the body navigates by positioning sensory 
regularities to one another, and that this holds for any form or navigation, be that material or 
conceptual, for both are scaled behavior differentiated by their natural statistics and the 
position (i.e. whole body or brain) from which that action is measured. Positional cells fire in 
regularities to iteratively position these statistics, cycling S1 and S2, pacing brain and bodily 
behavior such that creatures find their way and develop further sensory pathfinding as S3. 
 
 
Further refining navigation 
Eichenbaum uses Gallistel’s definition of navigation as “the process of determining and 
maintaining a course or trajectory from one place to another” (Gallistel in Eichenbaum, 
2017a). This definition (Gallistel & King, 2009) still holds here if we change the word ‘place’ 
to ‘position’ (since a place is a position but a position is not necessarily a place). Navigation 
can be from place to place but also from position to position, be that from a conceptual 
position, an image, a sentence, an idea, etc. Eichenbaum’s notion that hippocampal 
representations are inferred as a conjunction of sensory input and location (Eichenbaum, 
2017b; Eichenbaum & Cohen, 1988) easily reorients to hippocampal activity matching 
incoming sensory statistics as translated by the body into ongoing activity, such that 
‘representation’ is the measurement of that activity from some designated position. 
 
An example is the layered continuity of walking through the park and remembering walking 
through the park. It is not that one is spatial and one nonspatial, or one real and the other a 
simulation, but that they are nested (Northoff, 2018b) overlapping navigation. They are 
behaviors measured from different positions. In both, the nervous system and body navigate 
sensory statistics and that activity itself positions those regularities to all that has come before 
(the path is the walking of it) (Varela, 2017). Walking through a park is sensory regularity 
 
29 
(proprioception, smell of freshly mown lawn, sound of water). Remembering that walk is 
sensing one’s own patterns of cognition at a different scale but similar pattern, continuous 
with and part of the current ongoing encounter and its statistics (like a Mandelbrot set). What 
we experience as walking through a park or remembering walking through a park are not 
events with beginnings or ends but different weightings of habitual and habituating bodily 
(including NS) activity, some of which turns and shifts constantly, some of which maintains a 
rhythmic baseline (Buzsáki, 2006). The brain’s activity carries within it (as a path carries 
previous footsteps) all previous iterations of regularities as experienced in the encounter. The 
brain does not suddenly start and stop navigation, it is always navigating, shifting what is 
being navigated according to what is encountered, its parameters relative to all previously 
encountered; natural statistics are pace and context. 
 
 
Towards a process model 
Bickhard has written that the history of science is the history of replacing substance 
assumptions with process models, the study of mind being among the last using vocabulary 
that looks for substances: “Here, substance assumptions are still ubiquitous, ranging from 
models of representation to those of emotions to personality and psychopathology. Substance 
assumptions do pernicious damage to our ability to understand such phenomena” (Bickhard, 
2003).4  Perhaps current folk assumptions of memory storage leaning towards substance 
cloud us from understanding “memory” as a measurement and productively applying 
dynamical methods. Changing the weights of our vocabulary does not mean replacing them 
with synonyms. Rather, the words as they already exist in vocabulary must be reweighted 
towards processual forms of experimentation and data analysis. 
 
Substance assumptions can be traced in numerous directions; Descartes is most obvious. 
Descartes wrote that the essence of the body was its extension in space and that the essence of 
mind was thought, assuming mind and thought are nonspatial: If we “examine what we are, 
we see very clearly that neither extension nor shape nor local motion, nor anything of this 
kind which is attributable to a body, belongs to our nature, but that thought alone belongs to 
it”(Descartes, 1993). As Gilbert Ryle pointed out long ago, however, it is a category mistake 
 
4 A proposed armistice to the “representation wars” via active inference and enactive generalization (Constant, 2021) is in 
this direction. This paper reorients predictive processing to metacogntive parameters, meaning all prediction is S3. 
Helmholz’s Unbewusster Schluss is not a prediction but an unconscious S1 or S2 reading. 
 
30 
to assume processes measured by words are substances (Ryle, 1949) simply because they 
have been measured, nor can one assume they are contained by that measurement. An ocean 
is not contained by a measurement of it. Running is not distinct from the body that is doing it 
just because one can measure it as speed. Tasting is not distinct from the body even once the 
body develops the capacity to measure sweetness. We use measurements to communicate and 
predict; they are made up of sensory regularities molded into representations of activities that 
transcend them. Smelling is not smell. Thinking is not thought. Walking is not mileage. 
Miles, thoughts, and smells are measurements that represent regularities. 
 
Similarly, cognitive space and abstract space are not substantive places but positional 
measurements of activity. We can use conceptual space models (Gärdenfors, 2000) as ways 
of modeling regularities (similarities, quality dimensions, etc.) of ongoing activities5-- sights 
or smells are measurements of spatial or temporal activities such as light or sound (Clark, 
1992). Conceptual space models show us how we develop measurements and representations 
from an S3 level of manipulation of S2 (Theves et al., 2020). But looking for conceptual 
models inside brains keeps us from using them to understand activity: Neurons do not 
correlate to nodes; nodes show us weights of activity relative to statistical regularities of the 
encounter. Quality dimensions (Clark, 1992; Gärdenfors, 2000) do not show how neurons 
organize and fire but give us a bridge for understanding how statistical regularities in the 
environment translate to brain dynamics. For now, however, rather than measuring the 
encounter, we measure representations. We do not use models to measure brain activity to the 
encounter but rather measure models against models. Take this abstract below: 
 
Whereas the hippocampus is essential to spatial navigation via a cognitive map, its 
role derives from the relational organization and flexibility of cognitive maps and not 
from a selective role in the spatial domain. Correspondingly, hippocampal networks 
map multiple navigational strategies, as well as other spatial and nonspatial memories 
(Eichenbaum, 2017b). 
 
Assuming and using the Cartesian terms above confuses what is being measured with the 
measurement and blocks application of Eichenbaum’s insight regarding the continuity of 
 
5 Gardenförs uses the term cognitive space instrumentally (Gärdenfors, 2000). This is not a refutation of cognitive space, it 
only asks that we understand that cognitive space is not in the brain but a form of measurement. His models become 
especially crucial after this reorientation. 
 
31 
navigation and memory—the realization that cognition is a regularity of activity that bodies 
evolve to navigate and that hippocampi formations play a role in global memory for multiple 
systems that are not only measurable as Euclidean (Momennejad, 2020; Sherry & Schacter, 
1987; Wood et al., 1999). Rephrasing Eichenbaum conducive to this paper we get: 
 
Whereas the essentiality of the hippocampus to navigation can be measured by a 
cognitive map, its role derives from the relational organization and flexibility of 
activity those cognitive maps measure and not from a selective role in a particular 
action. The regular activity of hippocampal networks positions sensory regularities in 
a way that scales to any form of navigation, be it movement through a maze, clicking 
through a task, engaging in conversation, or reading texts. 
 
Richard Rorty and others have pointed out that our problems (and potentials) change 
according to the assumptions of our vocabularies (Rorty, 1999). Luckily, vocabularies are 
malleable, and words can be reframed through new methods and measurements. 
 
Figure 4: Exciting developments as shown here in (Bellmund et al., 2018) suggest conceptual and behavioral navigation 
may have a scaled relationship. These scales may become clear with an optimization of current methods and vocabulary 
towards taking the metrics of the experiment into analysis. 
 
 
Current measurements 
Since Hubel and Wiesel’s single-neuron recordings, it has become standard to study 
cognition by presenting stimuli to the brain (through the body) and measuring the 
spatiotemporal distribution of its neuronal “response” (Buzsáki, 2019), assuming a linear 
relationship between the stimulus and the activity observed (Northoff, 2018b). The stimuli 
presented can be beeps, lines, photos of faces, etc. The goal is to find a representation in the 
brain that correlates with the stimulus. What one ends up with is a representation (i.e., an 
fMRI image) said to correlate with a beep, line, photo, etc., which is itself an unmeasured 
representation (i.e., to say a photo of a face is ‘angry’ is to measure it, but not with metrics 
that can be compared or scaled). 
 
In this tradition of experimentation pioneered by Sherrington, measurements (EEG, MEG, 
fMRI) of a predefined part of the brain measure how blood flow or frequencies change when 
that prescribed area is presented with a stimulus, and recorded activity is assumed a reaction 
 
32 
to that stimulus (Northoff, 2018b; Raichle, 2011). The spatiotemporal statistics of the 
stimulus are not measured. Though effort is made to keep the body’s focus on the stimulus, 
the body is part of an ongoing encounter. This is not accounted for in the experiment, nor is 
the ongoing activity of the brain. The experiment tries to regularize the encounter but does 
not include that regularization in the way the experiment is assessed. As Hasson describes it: 
On a moment-to-moment basis, the brain is assimilating dynamic, multidimensional 
information about the world in order to produce rich, context-dependent behaviors. 
Confronted with such complexity, experimental neuroscientists traditionally design 
controlled experiments to reduce the dimensionality of the problem to a few factors 
conceived by the experimenter (Fisher, 1935). This reductionist program relies on a 
core commitment to the assumption that the neural computations supporting many of 
our cognitive functions can be decontextualized and decomposed into a handful of 
latent features, that these features are human interpretable and can be manipulated in 
isolation, and that the piecemeal recomposition of these features will yield a satisfying 
understanding of brain and behavior. (Hasson et al., 2020) 
 
It is no surprise that brains that have experienced similar encounters will be active in similar 
ways in a stringently regularized experimental encounter with a stimulus. Such measurements 
may not help in understanding how a body (and NS) navigate the everyday encounter 
successfully or its parameters of health and illness. Reorienting to notice how a body 
matches, aligns, or fits directly with that encounter to navigate it may be more fruitful. 
Hasson points out that evolution optimizes millions of parameters (Hasson et al., 2020). If we 
use the spatiotemporal parameters of the experiment as part of the data, it may be possible to 
find ways of observing how bodies habituate to regularities and how those bodies sense their 
own habituations; millions of parameters used by evolution are then to the experiment’s 
benefit. 
 
 
Tolman Eichenbaum Machine 
An exercise towards how to build such experiments of processual conjunctions (ongoing, 
layered sensing and positioning) by way of pattern regularity could come through 
modification (i.e., different use of the term ‘representation’) of the Tolman Eichenbaum 
Machine (TEM). TEM aims to explain how the brain converts abstract knowledge ‘to 
constrain new representations’ (J. C. R. Whittington et al., 2020) which, in terms of this 
 
33 
paper, would become ‘to modify ongoing activity’ (TEM itself being the representation). As 
TEM puts it: 
…results suggest that the zoo of different cell types found in entorhinal cortex may be 
viewed under a unified framework - summarising the common statistics of tasks into 
basis functions that can be flexibly composed depending on the particular structural 
constraints of the environment the animal/agent faces. (J. C. R. Whittington et al., 
2020). 
Reorienting TEM via this paper, Eichenbaum’s conjunction of ‘structural’ and ‘sensory’ 
holds and those conjunctions are capable of being sensed and adjusted by the same organ 
sensing and structuring them. Once we understand representations as measurements of 
regularities of activity between brains rather than within them, this model helps us understand 
how the body and NS match to regularities of the ongoing encounter and develop to read 
those habits as further sensory input. TEM’s substance-based vocabulary could be shifted to a 
processual model. What it needs is metrics for what the model is being trained upon. 
 
TEM’s proposal that entorhinal cells (grid, band, border, object-vector) form a structural 
basis while hippocampal cells (place, landmark) link this basis to sensory ‘representations’ 
(statistical regularities or habits made by the NS and sensed by it) (J. C. R. Whittington et al., 
2020) could be linked to the natural statistics of the encounter or experiment if methods 
shifted to include the metrics of the experiment itself. To do this would require a way of 
measuring the training itself and including this as part of the model: This allows one to probe 
into how spatiotemporal dynamics of the encounter are positioned such that navigation of a 
maze has regularities which scale with the spatiotemporal dynamics of the regularities for the 
body; the navigation of a conceptual task could be measured compared to the spatiotemporal 
dynamics of that task in terms of scaled patterns or statistics. As this would take a lot of trials 
for an individual, it requires a computational, generalized model. Still, rather than comparing 
conceptual to behavioral, it would be necessary to measure TEM by the spatiotemporal 
statistics of whatever it is being trained on, then do different trials and compare the patterns 
via methods that look for factorization (or fractalization) and scaling. 
 
Figure 5: Could factorization as presented above in (Behrens et al., 2018) be expanded through metricizing the experiment 
and looking at the factors as scaling ecologically according to the position of measurement? 
 
 
34 
If an experiment was done that could itself be measured statistically, one could use the basic 
TEM model (see (J. C. Whittington et al., 2019)) to see how the space and time of the 
encounter translates into space and time of the NS. To say that positional cells in the HEF 
may generalize is to say that for the NS, regularities of sensory statistics are not differentiated 
into conceptual and physical but are scaled. For the brain, scale shifts according to what 
regularities obtain. One needs to compare the regularities of what the algorithm is trained on 
to the regularities of how it TEM’s them. Research relative to factorization (Behrens et al., 
2018; Buzsáki, 2019) could be recast as habituating responses to the encounter’s natural 
statistics. Habituations established through positioning encountered sensory statistics (the 
positioning or adjustment of priors) would account for a body’s ability to increase its 
awareness of the patterns it builds developmentally; the structural generalization is already 
inherent in the encounter. Once the “transitions have been experienced” (J. C. R. Whittington 
et al., 2020) weightings come through chemical or electrical translation of sensory input such 
that “a new node can be introduced with a single relation” so long as that relation has been 
previously encountered “all other relations can be immediately inferred”(J. C. R. Whittington 
et al., 2020).6 
 
The “immediate inferences in new environments” that TEM explains are not inferences but 
fittings or matchings; the NS and body’s reading of its own habits (built developmentally 
over time) allows adjustment. Learning occurs through navigation pruning what is relevant 
(Gustafson & Daw, 2011; Momennejad, 2020; J. C. R. Whittington et al., 2020; Zeithamova 
& Bowman, 2020). The encounter holds the cues of relevance by the regularity of its 
statistical structure, scaffolded by each iteration of experienced priors as active proclivities. 
These priors ecologically shape the sequences and activity the body is as it navigates; the 
encounter is the storage of its encountered statistics. TEM could model this 
multidimensionally. To be able to get the most from a model like TEM, however, requires a 
new way of approaching analysis. As discussed below, scale free methods could be added to 
optimize current ones (Golesorkhi et al., 2021; Tang et al., 2021) if we metricize experiments 
and measure their statistics. 
 
 
Emphasizing baseline activity 
 
6 Jeff Hawkins theory, if reoriented from the brain building models to the brain building habits that observers then model, 
would also be an excellent way of thinking of this. 
 
35 
Stimulus-based tasks in the tradition of Sherrington have come to dominate neuroscience 
(Raichle, 2011) but Sherrington’s student Thomas Brown suggested an early alternative, 
emphasizing that neural activity in the spinal cord and brain stem was likely not driven by 
stimuli outside the body and brain (Northoff, 2018b). Brown believed activity in these areas, 
crucial for cognition, was generated and maintained by the NS without much input. Hans 
Berger further noted how this ‘spontaneous activity’ did not depend on the encounter even as 
the body used it, a view further supported by Bishop and Lashley (Northoff, 2018b). Recent 
research on spontaneous oscillations (Buzsáki, 2006; Llinas, 2014; Yuste et al., 2005) has 
underlined and expanded this notion, as has the observation of spontaneous connectivity in 
different brain areas and a new concentration on the default mode network (DMN) as 
connected to cognitive processes such as mind-wandering (Fox et al., 2015; Greicius et al., 
2003; Hwang et al., 2016; J. Qin et al., 2015; P. Qin & Northoff, 2011; Raichle, 2011, 2015; 
Uddin et al., 2008). 
 
DMN activity has been shown to activate during ‘memory retrieval’ and to deactivate for 
‘novel encoding’ (Huijbers et al., 2009). Some attribute this to different levels of attention 
while others argue hippocampal regions couple with the DMN for retrieval but decouple for 
encoding. Another way to look at this would be to say that the regularities of the encounter 
are statistically positioned by the HEF to all previously encountered over development—
weighted by firing patterns relative to priors—so baseline activity is left undisturbed unless it 
passes threshold deviation (‘surprise’) at which point S3 awareness of S2 activity is needed 
for adjustment. This interpretation leans towards a model whereby sensory statistics are 
organized by the brain’s ongoing dynamics, and modes of behavior generalize to regularities 
of the encounter (Fazelpour & Thompson, 2015; Northoff et al., 2010; Northoff, 2018b). 
 
Place and grid cells fire differently according to the body’s position in the encounter (Behrens 
et al., 2018; Eichenbaum et al., 1999; E. I. Moser et al., 2008). The regularities of the 
encounter (i.e., particular parts of a room) shape the regularities of the NS. Although room 
regularities are measured differently than the firing regularities of cells, their ability to be 
measured from the same position means they likely share patterns of factorization, but current 
methods do not look for such patterns. To do so requires comparing the brain’s 
spatiotemporal rhythm, paced through evolution and development, to the body’s sensorial 
translation of the encounter and how this works with baseline activity to produce the body’s 
ongoing behavior (Northoff, 2018a,b) and how this scales with the statistics of the encounter. 
 
36 
 
CN mostly ignores the spatiotemporal dynamics of encounters and baseline activity to focus 
on correlating a stimulus to a voxelated part of the brain. But some work in spatial cognition 
asks how such high firing regularities arise in HEF cells. The Moser group, for example, has 
wondered about “whether ensembles of place cells are completely formed by experience or if 
there is an underlying component that is hardwired in the circuit“ (M.B. Moser et al., 2015). 
Perhaps positional cell statistics are more like a heartbeat, perhaps there is a baseline activity 
which, through its regularity, positions sensory information, which is itself regular because of 
the regularity of the encounter. Studies show that exploration can set a stable firing field 
(Frank et al., 2004; M. A. Wilson & McNaughton, 1993) and that new place fields depend on 
an animal’s attention to the spatial features of the encounter (Kentros et al., 2004; Monaco et 
al., 2014):  
Thus, place maps are expressed, in some form, from the very moment when animals 
are put into an environment for the first time, although the map may evolve further 
with experience. The findings raise the possibility that a skeletal map of a novel 
environment is drawn from a set of preexisting maps, and then gets modified to fit the 
specifics of the environment through experience-dependent plasticity (Samsonovich 
and McNaughton 1997; Dragoi and Tonegawa 2011, 2013) (M.B. Moser et al., 2015). 
Another way of looking at this might be to say that HEF dynamics set baseline via 
development (ancestral, environmental) due to the regularity of the encounter but can be 
adjusted by the brain’s evolved capacity to sense or read those dynamics (S2) and become 
aware of behavioral regularities (S3). This would allow patterns encountered to be constantly 
translated by the body according to all patterns previously encountered within certain 
parameters. Extreme novelty in either direction would adjust overall activity, but in most 
cases, activity would self-navigate, perhaps along the lines of (Shin et al., 2021).7 
 
Navigation is typically divided into survey and wayfinding, the first would be sorting that 
does not require awareness (S1), while the later would be sorting that requires further sorting 
of previous sortings (those sortings themselves now what is read) into larger chunks of 
 
7 High emotion means better remembering of the statistics encountered (Dolan, 2002). Old theories separate emotion 
from cognition and behavior (Aizawa, 2017; Dolan, 2002; Mahoney, 1974). It may be more productive to see cognition as 
bodily behavior, and emotion as a scale of both. Modifying cognition modifies behavior, and modifying behavior modifies 
cognition. One cannot, for example, begin to exercise daily without modifying inner bodily behaviors such as metabolism, 
breathing, and heart rate and larger scale behaviors like eating and sleep. Emotions may be responses to this edgework. 
 
 
37 
activity (S2) which sometimes requires awareness of those habituations (S3) thus making S3 
‘remembering’ a matter of attention (Chun & Turk-Browne, 2007), the ability to notice the 
behavior as it is happening. Importantly, what is often termed “top-down” cognition could be 
understood as the baseline’s role in cognition (inside-out scripts determining cognition, 
scripts scaffolded by the ongoing encounter) or S3 awareness/adjustment of S2 readings of 
baseline activity. 
 
 
Natural statistics 
From Helmholtz through Tolman and beyond, regularities of the encounter have been shown 
to be crucial for cognition (Horace Barlow, 2002). From day one of development, the sensory 
statistics of a body’s interactions habituate cognition, matching or fitting to an ongoing 360-
degree encounter. Northoff’s use of Barlow’s term natural statistics addresses these 
regularities as “the statistical frequency distribution of a stimulus across discrete positions in 
time and space“ (Barlow, 2001; Northoff, 2018b). 
 
Barlow’s work can be taken to understand the body as immersed in regular, comprehensive 
overparameterization similar to Hasson’s direct fit (Barlow, 2001; Hasson et al., 2020). As a 
demonstration of the regularity of encountered statistics, Hasson gives the example of 
walking down the street in Boston to walking the street in Princeton—most of the natural 
statistics are similar, though others clearly distinguish each. Similarly, Barlow speaks of 
‘chunks of stimuli’ that regularly cluster, more conjunctive than feature. Northoff relates this 
to an experience of music: Tones are represented as separate in order to understand them but 
they are not created or heard separately; the NS does not encode distinct tones but rather 
distributions of regularity experienced as melody (Barlow, 2001; Northoff, 2018b). Natural 
statistics are the regularities that the body habituates (S1) and need not notice (via S3) when 
sensing those regularities (S2) to navigate. Inner spatiotemporal scales are key for ‘input 
processing’ of the encounter because they work for those regularities, creating another set of 
natural statistics in brain and body (Golesorkhi et al., 2021). 
 
Figure 6: Image from Nature study by Northoff lab showing potential way of observing spatiotemporal scales for what they 
call neural and mental and this paper would define as different scales of navigation (Golesorkhi et al., 2021). 
Natural statistics are never one stimulus but immersive. Still, once such parameters have been 
habituated, when regularities change past parameters, remembering and thinking change. 
 
38 
Situated sensory experiences create statistically-similar effects—the general relaxing quality 
of a park, for example, or the spirit of a football match or concert. These spaces come with 
sensory signatures because they have statistical sensory regularities, but some bodies 
experience them with different baseline activity, with outlier habituations (such as those 
termed autistic). 
 
Regularities are only “predispositions in the infant brain” (Northoff, 2018b). Through 
development, a body matches to the statistical regularities of the encounter, as well as to 
inherited representational regularities (i.e., language, images). Even though brain activity 
arrives structured by evolution towards particular patterns and affordances, early matching to 
the encounter sets the pace within those parameters (Northoff, 2018b). Early years of 
development have a strong impact on how a person navigates their world and how their NS 
and body responds to the encounter (Tierney & Nelson, 2009). Recent studies have shown 
that baseline spatiotemporal measurements of adulthood are predictive of the subject’s early 
experience of trauma (Northoff & Stanghellini, 2016; Stanghellini et al., 2017).  
 
Once cognition is framed as continuous with navigation, earlier layers of navigation 
(positioned sensory statistics) can be understood as forming foundational (S1) tunings of non-
cortex proclivities in the HEF, the thalamus and deeper pattern-generating brain regions 
(Zimnik & Churchland, 2021). Through interaction with others the body develops the ability 
to sense/read its own acquired statistics (likely via corollary discharge & cortex) and then to 
become aware of those readings (S3): the body would have to reach a threshold of interaction 
with others for such development to become explicit to the body itself (S3). This is consistent 
with research suggesting metacognition is acquired through a long developmental process 
(Carruthers, 2006; Heyes, 2018; Rouault et al., 2018; Weil et al., 2013). 
 
Measuring such regularities experimentally requires dynamic, difference-based measures 
which look at how patterns shift rather than at how contained things correlate. Experiments 
are built ecologies with spatiotemporal signatures that must be accounted for by 
measurement. Emerging calls for ecological methods (Holleman et al., 2021; Shamay-Tsoory 
& Mendelsohn, 2019) point in this direction but are not enough. Specific to navigation and 
positional cells, recent experiments done ecologically with bats move towards this view 
(Dotson & Yartsev, 2021; Eliav et al., 2021). Still, it is necessary to imagine ecological ways 
of measuring and collecting data, not only of creating ecological settings. Current methods do 
 
39 
not consider the spatiotemporal statistics of the environments, even though technology is 
advanced enough to control those statistics and measure them: VR, AI, and modern biometric 
technologies (wearables, etc.) make it possible to measure the encounter, the body, and the 
NS ecologically. 
 
 
Heuristics for reorientation 
We have seen that our awareness of remembering and thinking (S3 awareness of S2 activity, 
what we call memories and thoughts) are measurements (from the position of the body) of 
ongoing activity, and that representations are not in heads but created between bodies. We 
have also seen that the HEF is crucial for this process, and that modeling how 
sensory/positioning conjunctions function and generalize through firing regularities of HEF 
cells further clarifies cognition as action. In this way, we can understand navigating as 
ongoing sensing and positioning, and thinking and remembering as forms of this activity. 
 
Accepting remembering and thinking as behaviors continuous with navigation means 
reorienting how we analyze data. Rather than imagining these as sandwiched between stimuli 
and representations of cognition, for example, we attempt to take the statistics of the 
experiment/encounter into account and observe regularities in scaling across trials. This 
means looking at the frequencies of the encounter and those of the brain spatiotemporally and 
seeing what equations might be generated to understand how they factorize or fractalize. It 
also means considering the brain’s ongoing ‘inside’ rhythms and baseline activity as positions 
different from the body, with different patterns of pacing and regulation. 
 
Spatiotemporal neuroscience (SN) is a method for studying cognition in its ongoing, long-
term development towards observing and measuring how encountered dynamics are 
translated by the body and NS to habituate actions (Northoff et al., 2020a). SN focuses on 
world-brain relation as measured by spatiotemporal patterns in dynamic interaction, positing 
a way of relating spatiotemporal features of the brain and body using non-standard statistical 
analysis (scale-free methods such as power law exponents and auto correlation) and a 
consideration of vantage point in measurement (Northoff, 2018b).  
 
Figure 6: Optimization of CN proposed by (Northoff et al., 2020b) 
 
 
40 
Such methods point towards reconsidering data according to the proposals above, focusing on 
the brain’s spatiotemporal patterns of activity in statistical terms, shifting from function and 
information to dynamics and pattern (Northoff 2020a). Rather than focus on contents 
(stimuli, inputs, outputs), it reorients spatiotemporal brain dynamics in relation to the 
encounter and distinguishes their measurement via point of view (Northoff et al., 2020a). It 
looks for patterns of activity and how space and time might be measurements of that activity 
from positions, taking baseline brain dynamics as crucial for developing models and methods. 
 
Such measurements may help us understand how the sensory body converts activity of the 
encounter such that the inner dynamics of the brain can, without much change, continue as 
normal while also “using” the frequency and energy of the encounter for movement and 
sustenance. SN posits that scales change but a pattern of relation between the encounter and 
the reading of that encounter remains in a fractal or scale-free manner (Damiani et al., 2019; 
Golesorkhi et al., 2021; He, 2014; Northoff et al., 2020b). Perhaps further scaling metrics 
(Owen et al., 2021) could be applied to navigation and memory. 
 
Buzsáki also flips the usual outside-in script to emphasize inner dynamics: “Brains largely 
organize themselves, rather than being enslaved to input signals,” he writes, and “internally 
generated, self-organized patterns in the brain acquire ‘meaning‘ through action, which 
becomes what we call ‘experience’.” (Buzsáki, 2019). If space and time are understood as 
measurements, an idea close to what Buzsáki and Llinás already advocate (Buzsáki & Llinás, 
2017), it becomes possible to see action as bidirectional, with inner brain dynamics setting a 
baseline pace to be disturbed as little as possible. Inner brain dynamics have their own space 
and time from the point of view of an observer, translated by the body but bidirectionally 
interacting with an ongoing encounter which develops and adjusts those dynamics via 
development and lifespan. 
 
Though spontaneous (baseline) activity has been studied relative to cognition for decades 
(Mazoyer et al., 2001), the majority of task and stimulus-based experiments still consider the 
NS as if it were “an organ at rest, in which excitation arises only as a response to stimuli” 
(Goldstein, 1995; Northoff, 2018). Internally organized activity that is not immediately 
influenced by sensory inputs or motor output is “a necessary condition for cognition” such 
that (Buzsáki, 2019). Still, disregarding ongoing activity is the norm in experiments that 
 
41 
focus on particular stimuli and voxel delineations, but variability may open better methods 
(Dinstein et al., 2015; Waschke et al., 2021); the encounter never stops. 
 
SN posits that the space and time of these inner dynamics are measured from a different 
position than spatiotemporal dynamics from the world: This means space and time within the 
body (i.e. for a population of neurons) are measured from a different position than whole-
body measurements, but that those measurements maintain a fractal relationship (Northoff, 
2018b). Different scales can be compared in different forms of navigation depending on the 
natural statistics of what is encountered (a maze, a computer program, the subject’s own 
replay) (Northoff, 2018a, 2018b; Northoff et al., 2020a). Understanding spatiotemporal 
measurements positionally requires what Northoff calls a ‘Copernican shift of vantage point’ 
which is expanded here to mean a shift of view from individual to ecological. 
 
SN does not recognize the mind-body problem; to humor those arguments is to fall into the 
same Cartesian trap that formed current vocabulary and methods discussed earlier as 
problematic. Instead, it looks at empirical features of the brain, such as the importance of 
baseline activity (Northoff et al., 2010). Noticing how natural statistics scale or fractalize is a 
way to stop sandwiching cognitive between outside and inside (Northoff, 2018b) and see the 
body as continuous with its encounter even as it maintains and adjusts its dynamics. 
 
 
Relevance to navigation and memory  
Using memory means we have reached S3. One has to reverse engineer to understand S2 and 
S1, which means reconceiving classic delineations of memory systems (Nadel & Hardt, 2011; 
Sherry & Schacter, 1987; Tulving, 1983). A reorientation is as follows: In development, the 
NS aligns to spatiotemporal regularities of its encounter to maximize energy and resources. 
This paces baseline activity, which sets parameters for how the brain positions and reads 
discrepancies. Habituations to natural statistics scale to all forms of navigation—walking to 
the park, telling someone how to walk to the park, etc. These use nested regularities of action, 
but context and awareness of desired outcome frame what bodily behavior follows from what 
brain behavior: The tone played by the encounter shifts the scale of action, which is the 
ongoing music. 
 
 
42 
Describing how to go to the park, for example, is not rhythmic context for my body to 
generate movements to go to the park. The dog sitting at the door is. The spatiotemporal 
scales of the encounter—the conversation, the dog’s cue—are the notes being played that 
determine shifts of bodily action as intrinsic habituated scales. It’s not that navigating to the 
park is the same as describing navigating to the park, but rather that both activities require the 
same changes of similarity of scale in their scripts; they are nested or fractalized. How the 
tone of the ongoing encounter cues or fits to inner dynamics could be a matter of brain 
oscillations, especially sharp wave ripples (Buzsáki, 2006). S3 awareness of S2, or S2 
disengagement from the encounter to read S1 regularities, could be evident in changes of 
scale and help explain what Buzsáki means by internalized memory operations when he 
writes that:  
…comparison of spatial and mental navigation indicates how disengagement of 
navigation networks from their external dependence could transform them into 
internalized memory operations. This recognition simplifies our understanding of 
neuronal mechanisms of apparently different functions. While spatial navigation, 
memory, planning and imagination are distinct terms, their neuronal substrates and 
neurophysiological mechanisms are identical or at least similar (Buzsáki, 2019). 
 
Connections of patterns in cognition need not be a matter of physical closeness or proximity 
of occurrence but can be shared patterns of statistical relation (pace, rhythm, timing). 
Traditional notions of time and space whereby something closer is likely to be more 
correlated than something distant are supplemented with understanding that activities sharing 
strong patterns of relation (such as a street once walked in Heidelberg and a street of similar 
statistics now being walked in Lisbon) are matters of spatiotemporal continuity. Nearness is 
not a matter of placement but of resonance, just as neurons that are not near to one another in 
the brain may be near to one another in firing rates (Buzsáki, 2019). Activity in the brain 
exhibits regular temporal patterns and different frequency bands exhibit patterns of relation 
(Buzsáki, 2006; Buzsáki et al., 2013; Xue et al., 2014), and “networks” in the brain 
(sensorimotor, central executive, etc.) relate through regularities of spatiotemporal dynamics. 
Comparing such networks to the encounter may illuminate psychopathology just as surely as 
correlating them to stimuli (de Pasquale et al., 2012; Menon, 2011). Just as different 
spatiotemporal frequency-fluctuations mediate and couple with one another in the nervous 
system, phase synchronizations are likely signatures of remembering and thinking in ways 
that look different in health as opposed to distress (Canolty & Knight, 2010; Fell & 
 
43 
Axmacher, 2011). Before a brief illumination of clinical examples, it helps to clarify 
nestedness and position, how measurements from positions create points of view. 
 
Nestedness 
Nestedness is a heuristic for understanding how numerous navigations can use fractalized 
positionings of sensory statistics. Reframed, one could understand what is currently called 
spatial and nonspatial (Eichenbaum et al., 1999; Eliav et al., 2021)—also behavioral and 
conceptual; physical space and concept space—as nested forms of navigation at different 
spatial and temporal scales (Koplenig, 2018; Morozov, 2008) perhaps as in (Owen et. al, 
2021; Schläpfer, 2021). 
 
Northoff describes this as a neuro-ecological continuum whereby spatiotemporal scales 
within the nervous system are nested with those of the body just as the body is nested within 
the scales of its ongoing encounter (Northoff, 2018b). Nestedness is only apparent for an 
observer—it is the positional measurements that are nested, their statistics, not the activity 
itself which is ongoing and need only be weighted by previous inertia to act. 
 
Such nested oscillations and nested synchrony in low and high frequency fluctuations (phase-
phase/power coupling) have been found in spontaneous activity using MEG (Monto, 2012 in 
Northoff, 2018b). Clark also points out regular statistical brain activity and its direct 
connection via an “extra-neuronal loop” with the statistics of the encounter (Clark, 2013). 
TEM shows positional cell firings preserve structure as the regularities of the encounter shift 
(J. C. R. Whittington et al., 2020). Such generalization is a kind of nestedness: Baking 
chocolate chip cookies with our kids reminds us of being kids ourselves and doing the 
same—as forms of navigation, these overlapping patterns of bodily activity have similar 
regularities due to their overlapping sensory and positional regularities; their oscillatory gear 
places them near. 
 
No wonder events seem to have sensory signatures. Going to a football match or a music 
concert means one’s overall bodily state aligns with that encounter. Northoff gives the 
example of dancing to music—how the spatiotemporal structure of body and music (the 
encounter) synchronize (Lakatos et al., 2008; Northoff, 2018b, p. 20; Northoff & Huang, 
2017). Recent studies in entrainment speak to this nested condition whereby shifting the 
 
44 
dynamics of the patterns of the encounter shifts the dynamics of the body and vice versa 
(Lakatos et al., 2008). 
 
Position 
This paper has oriented towards understanding part and whole as measurements from 
position: What is counted as a membrane or whole system is dependent on from where it is 
measured; spatiotemporal measurements change according to that position. Humans can 
measure from human positions but also from non-human positions such as cells or planets. 
This is possible via communicative representations (metrics) and tools (i.e. microscopes). A 
position at one scale can be made up of numerous positions at another scale, consciously, if 
those positions agree to a particular metric. Metrics and tools for measurement (telescopes, 
computers, books, languages, films, etc.) connect positions with common measurements and 
allow for shared points of view. This is how humans agree that cells form tissues, for 
example, or that planets form solar systems. The point of view is a shared set of parameters 
along the lines of what Kuhn described as a paradigm (Kuhn, 1970). 
 
As Northoff points out, “our epistemic reference does not need to be identical with our ontic 
location” (Northoff, 2018b). Perspectival readings of science (Giere, 2006) open a path for 
multiple perspectives and multiple systems of measurement to be real and accessible from 
one position, which is precisely what representations (communicative measurements) do as 
presented here—what language and metrics are, and why they create points of view. Theories 
of Newton and Einstein are not judged as right or wrong but rather by how they bring pieces 
of a communicative puzzle into communicative clarity (DiSalle, 2006; Massimi & McCoy, 
2020). This allows for a shared reality; the ability to communicate or miscommunicate 
necessitates it. Through shared tools and representations, humans find ways to expand point 
of view to positions beyond individual bodies and to realize points where parameters overlap. 
 
Shared measurements create shared points of view without subsuming individuals, yet any 
point of view is itself a positional measurement of continuous activity distinct from any 
measurement of it. Any definition of self, for example, is not a human being but rather a 
measurement of that being. Here we are reminded of what mathematicians have described as 
strange loops (D. R. Hofstadter , 2007; Sautoy, 2019), cyclical mathematical structures such 
as those in Escher’s paintings or Bach’s Shepard tones—iterations of measurement that end 
up measuring one another, seemingly coming back to the beginning but never crossing the 
 
45 
same place again, closed enough for feedback but open enough for emergence. All layers 
being contained inside all others makes sense when we understand them as measurements of 
an activity that those measurements are created from and perpetuate. As explained by the 
Ship of Theseus, spatiotemporal patterns observed continuously from a point of view define 
the regularity of what is encountered and allow a ship to remain a ship and come back to 
where it started, even if it no longer has a single original part and the starting point is in flux. 
Although the dynamics of both the ship and starting point change, the overall spatiotemporal 
patterns maintain their scale from some position. 
 
Wherever one sets the point from which to measure, perceived relations and structure align 
accordingly. Tools and shared representations bridge positions and points of view and 
‘wrong’ theories illuminate that activity. Theorizing an earth-centered solar system, for 
example, provided illumination that eventually overturned that same system with a sun-
centered one (Northoff, 2018b). Likewise, some of Newton’s wrong ideas still illuminate the 
workings of the world (DiSalle, 2002, 2006). Humans use language and tools to become 
aware of references that expand point of view, even as they remain communally constrained. 
In this way, we develop shared knowledge. 
 
The question that remains is: how can we analyze this metrically? Northoff introduces a 
bridge principle (by way of (Giere, 2004)) for data-reading and methods to measure 
nestedness of frequencies via a combination of difference-based measurements and natural 
statistics (Northoff, 2018b), asking: How are the natural statistics of the encounter translated 
or deferred by the body, and how do those statistics affect (or not) the statistics of the body’s 
baseline activity? Here we have a conversion system of energy, frequency, and vibration by 
way of scents, sounds, touches, tastes, stresses, weather, communication, thinking, etc. When 
we reframe cognition as continuous with navigation, we have a way of understanding how 
what we experience as memory and thought could form positionally via nested regularities in 
the sensory relations encountered as the body navigates.  
 
A person standing in Berlin’s TV tower sees the city differently from a person cycling its 
streets, even as Berlin is shared. Both views are true views of the same dynamic relation, both 
have different affordances, and another position can incorporate both positions within one 
larger point: One can create a virtual S3 map or app whereby numerous positions can share 
that same point of view. Such scaling happens when one reads a book about the city or 
 
46 
discusses the city with its inhabitants—point of view continually shifts and adjusts 
relationally through sharing of positions, path integrating by way of all that has come before 
while maintaining a continuity of relations (like the Ship of Theseus). Vantage points are 
continuous and cumulative because of this interlinking regularity such that one chunk of 
natural statistics links with another, just as Tolman’s rats were able to increase their range of 
inference by exploration. Depending upon the position from which the parameters of 
affordance are measured (cell, organ, body, community, etc.), structures and relations will 
have different statistics. As point of view expands ecologically, even fundamental tenets 
become somewhat mutable precisely because they are measurements (Smolin, 2018). 
 
All navigation is positional, and position scales to numerous points of view. Navigation 
through a landscape cannot be separated from position (nor can definitions of intelligence) 
whether that landscape is a planet, a city, a virtual environment, a computer task, a human, a 
cell, etc. If we understand remembering (and all cognition) as continuous with navigating, we 
understand it as evolved activity. To get an accurate gestalt of this activity, we need metrics 
for brain, body, and experiment. 
 
 
Possible experiment 
Though it is beyond this paper to conduct a study and analyze data, a possible course would 
be to do an experiment (S3) similar to (Kuhrt et al., 2021) using navigation of different 
sensory mazes and recalled navigation of those mazes while measuring baseline activity 
relative to tasks. The key would be to design the experiment such that the sensory 
components of the experiment itself could be measured and adjusted in complexity. Baseline 
would be normal sensory range for the individual and complexity would be sensory 
arrangements that deviate while an individual attempts to navigate a task. The components of 
this task would be measured and metricized through spatiotemporal means for measuring 
sensory frequencies (hertz, decibels, amplitude, etc.), while the body and NS are measured 
biometrically (Hill et al., 2012; Topalovic et al., 2020) possibly on the model of (Serrano et 
al., 2016; Tromp et al., 2018). One could (via S3) use scale free measurements to compare 
the frequency measurements of the VR experiment to those of the NS and body—finding 
patterns in an individual relative to parameters of healthy versus disrupted navigation, and 
evaluating how behaviors scale (Moon et al., 2020; Owen et al., 2021; Schläpfer et al., 2021) 
 
 
47 
 
Clinical potential 
From the point of view of this paper, cognitive illnesses are disruptions in navigation. This 
means disruptions in how the body weights and positions sensory regularities as it matches to 
its encounter, how it reads its habits (priors) in relation to that encounter, and its awareness of 
its behavior. In someone suffering from schizophrenia, patterns built of prior sensory 
statistics operating as baseline activity may be more heavily weighted than incoming statistics 
of the encounter such that those sequences have the phenomenological feel of the present 
(Northoff, 2016a, 2018a), so the patient loses their ability to sense the encounter, only 
sensing their own active priors (stuck in S2 without S3 access). A lesser version may happen 
when we ‘get lost in thought’ while engaging in another activity such as driving a car or 
walking down the street and cannot remember having driven or walked afterwards. 
 
In depression, rhythmic scale may be slower relative to the pace of the encounter (from an 
observer’s point of view). In mania, the other side of the spectrum, sensory/positional 
regularity of ongoing brain activity may scale faster than the body’s encounter (Northoff, 
2016a, 2018a, 2018b). In depression, awareness would have a negative sensory affect and a 
grounded quality (sensing would be weighted less than positioning) whereas in mania it 
would be more positive but less stable (sensing would be weighted more than positioning). 
 
When the parts of the body that sense and interact with the world deteriorate or when the 
encounter shifts beyond certain parameters, this causes distortions or disconnects in how 
patterns are cued, causing problems in memory. In Alzheimer’s, the breakdown of the body’s 
ability to sense regularities (impairments in vision, hearing, etc.) scrambles the HEF 
positional system as it no longer receives the habitual regularized cues its baseline activity 
paced itself on. In a condition such as autism, sensory weightings would likely be stronger 
and overwhelm the hippocampal-entorhinal (and eventually motor-sensory) systems which 
would result in different or delayed (S3) metacognition. 
 
Violent changes in sensory statistics and positional regularity (war, trauma, displacement, 
disease) would cause significant changes and distress in remembering and thinking. On the 
other hand, traveling or entering a new environment could cause changes in thinking, feeling, 
and the vividness of remembering on a scale experienced as positive. All of these are cases of 
 
48 
disruptions in how sensory regularities are weighted and positioned to baseline activity and 
the encounter. 
 
 
The commons of cognition and navigation 
This paper positions cognition as scales of navigation. This means thinking and remembering 
are how we find our way in the world, and brain and body behavior can be investigated and 
understood as scaled regularities relative to the regularities of the encounter being navigated. 
These are best investigated computationally and ecologically, whereby ecological means that 
rather than designating highly parameterized stimuli, experiments are metricized encounters. 
This requires an optimization in methods and analysis that takes the experiment itself into 
analysis. Scale-free methods could be added to the toolkit as ways of observing the 
complexity of spatiotemporal changes between the encounter and the body’s processing of it, 
and between brain/body behavior at different scales. Hippocampal research relative to 
navigation and memory has been offered here an example of this reorientation whereby 
computation focuses on regularities beyond dichotomies of subject-object/stimulus-response. 
 
From birth to death, a position navigates an ongoing 360-degree encounter. Bodies develop 
and habituate as they learn to walk, manipulate objects, and communicate, engaging in “rich, 
context-dependent behaviors” and cycling “dynamic, multidimensional information about the 
world” (Hasson et al., 2020). The brain “is not an information-absorbing, perpetual coding 
device, as it is often portrayed, but a venture-seeking explorer” that “ceaselessly interacts 
with, rather than just detects, the external world in order to remain itself” (Buzsáki, 2019). 
What is being navigated (light, sound, touch, thought, etc.) is spatiotemporally measurable 
from numerous positions, at numerous scales. Due to its continuality, encountered regularities 
likely scale between all positions even as they remain uncontainable and never (exactly) the 
same from any two points. 
 
Conscious S3 exploration is linked to active iteration within the HEF and its interaction with 
the cortex (see Chapter 3 in (Buzsáki, 2019)) reiterated via replay (Momennejad, 2020; 
Ólafsdóttir et al., 2018). HEF communication with the striatum, PFC and other brain areas 
cannot be separated (Ciaramelli, 2008; Eichenbaum, 2017b; Euston et al., 2012; Lara & 
Wallis, 2015; Vertes, 2006) but we can understand the HEF as a crucial crossroads. Cases 
like H.M. show how damage to the HEF results in a body’s inability to order and embed 
 
49 
ongoing sensory and spatial statistics with ongoing ecological regularities set by all previous 
encounters—i.e., to make new memories or augment old ones. This results in impairments in 
navigation, be that through a home, a maze, a book, emotions or thought (Bliss, 2007; Duff & 
Brown-Schmidt, 2012; MacKay et al., 1998; Squire, 2009). All this suggests that the HEF 
positions sensory statistics into active scripts or flexible habituations which match to the 
continuous unbroken encounter that is an individual’s life. Looking at how this common 
activity scales with different experimental metrics could provide important clinical insights. 
 
Reorienting methods and analysis means reorienting “the framework within which we view 
ourselves, our mental features, and the world” (Northoff, 2018b). If we understand cognition 
as continuous with navigation—as scaled behavior evolved through a body’s unique 
navigation of its ongoing encounter—we begin to shift our understanding of mind and 
agency. We understand that the body can become conscious of its mind, and even change it, 
but only through connection and communication with others.  
 
As mentioned earlier, the “revolutionary move of Copernicus consisted in seeing that our 
epistemic reference does not need to be identical with our ontic location” (Northoff, 2018b). 
This means positions evolve ecologically; positions can become aware of themselves as part 
of shared positions. “Presupposing a vantage point from within mind or brain, we could not 
but understand ourselves in a rather ego-… or neurocentric way” (Northoff, 2018b) and yet it 
is possible to shift the vantage point through communication—through the representations we 
create—to position ecologically. 
 
Measuring space and time is how we understand ourselves ecologically. Commons refers to 
what is not owned by any position but essential to each—resources such as air, water, and 
land as well as languages, archives, and relationships. The experiential resources of the 
commons are an ongoing, immediate, without-a-gap spatiality within which bodies are 
embedded and with which they navigate. There is no choice but to navigate or be navigated, 
for each change changes every other, just as adding or subtracting a drop from the ocean 
changes its overall mathematics even if most positional measurements remain the same. 
 
Understanding memory as evolved navigation allows us to see ourselves ecologically, to 
notice “we are part of the world rather than being its center” (Northoff, 2018).  This means 
widening traditionally egocentric views with “an allo- and eco-centric view of mental 
 
50 
features, ourselves, and our position within the world” (Northoff, 2018b). In an eco-centric 
view, the center is everywhere and each unique ‘I’ can shift between perspectives to become 
ecological. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bibliography 
 
Aizawa, K. (2017). Cognition and behavior. Synthese, 194(11), 4269–4288. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-014-0645-5 
 
Allen, T. A., Salz, D. M., McKenzie, S., & Fortin, N. J. (2016). Nonspatial Sequence Coding 
in CA1 Neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 36(5), 1547–1563. 
 
Appiah, A. (1991). Representations and Realism. Philosophical Studies: An International 
Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition, 61(1/2), 65–74. 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/4320169 
 
Arthur, R. (1994). Space and Relativity in Newton and Leibniz. The British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science, 45(1), 219–240. 
 
Baker, B., Lansdell, B.J., & Kording, K.P. (2021). A Philosophical Understanding of 
Representation for Neuroscience. 
 
Barlow, H. (2001a). Redundancy reduction revisited. Network: Computation in Neural 
Systems, 12(3), 241–253. https://doi.org/10.1080/net.12.3.241.253 
 
Barlow, H. (2001). The exploitation of regularities in the environment by the brain. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24(4), 602–607. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X01000024 
 
Barsalou, L. W. (2010). Grounded Cognition: Past, Present, and Future: Topics in Cognitive 
Science. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(4), 716–724. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-
8765.2010.01115.x 
 
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind: Collected essays in anthropology, 
psychiatry, evolution, and epistemology (pp. xxvi, 545). Jason Aronson. 
 
Baumann, V., Hansen, A., & Wolf, S. (2016). The measurement problem is the measurement 
problem is the measurement problem. ArXiv:1611.01111 [Quant-Ph]. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.01111 
 
 
51 
Behrens, T. E. J., Muller, T. H., Whittington, J. C. R., Mark, S., Baram, A. B., Stachenfeld, 
K. L., & Kurth-Nelson, Z. (2018). What Is a Cognitive Map? Organizing Knowledge for 
Flexible Behavior. Neuron, 100(2), 490–509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.10.002 
 
Bellmund, J. L. S., Gärdenfors, P., Moser, E. I., & Doeller, C. F. (2018b). Navigating 
cognition: Spatial codes for human thinking. Science, 362(6415), Article 6415. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat6766 
 
Berke, J. D. (2009). Procedural Learning: Striatum. In Encyclopedia of Neuroscience (pp. 
1107–1116). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-008045046-9.00781-6 
 
BI 063 Uri Hasson: The Way Evolution Does It | Brain Inspired. (2021, September 30). 
https://braininspired.co/podcast/63/ 
 
Bickhard, M. H. (2009). The interactivist model. Synthese, 166(3), 547–591. 
 
Birch, J., Ginsburg, S., & Jablonka, E. (2020). Unlimited Associative Learning and the 
origins of consciousness: A primer and some predictions. Biology & Philosophy, 35(6), 56. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-020-09772-0 
 
Bliss, T. (2007). The hippocampus book. The Hippocampus Book., xx, 832–xx, 832. 
 
Brette, R. (2018). Is coding a relevant metaphor for the brain? BioRxiv, 168237. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/168237 
 
Brette, R. (2019). Is coding a relevant metaphor for the brain? Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 42, e215-undefined. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X19000049 
 
Buzsáki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the brain (pp. xv, 448). Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195301069.001.0001 
 
Buzsáki, G. (2019). The Brain from Inside Out. Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190905385.001.0001 
Buzsáki, G. (2020). The Brain–Cognitive Behavior Problem: A Retrospective. ENeuro, 7(4), 
Article 4. https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0069-20.2020 
 
Buzsáki, G., & Llinás, R. (2017). Space and time in the brain. Science, 358(6362), 482. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aan8869 
 
Buzsáki, G., Logothetis, N., & Singer, W. (2013). Scaling Brain Size, Keeping Timing: 
Evolutionary Preservation of Brain Rhythms. Neuron, 80(3), 751–764. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.002 
 
Buzsáki, G., & Moser, E. I. (2013). Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in the 
hippocampal-entorhinal system. Nature Neuroscience, 16(2), 130–138. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3304 
 
Canolty, R. T., & Knight, R. T. (2010). The functional role of cross-frequency coupling. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(11), 506–515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2010.09.001 
 
 
52 
Carruthers, P. (2006). The architecture of the mind: Massive modularity and the flexibility of 
thought (pp. xviii, 462). Clarendon Press/Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199207077.001.0001 
 
Charles, E. (2012). Ecological Psychology. In Encyclopedia of Human Behavior: Second 
Edition (pp. 7–12). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-375000-6.00142-7 
 
Chersi, F., & Burgess, N. (2015). The Cognitive Architecture of Spatial Navigation: 
Hippocampal and Striatal Contributions. Neuron, 88(1), 64–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.09.021 
 
Chomsky, N. (1959). Review of V erbal Behavior. Language, 35(1), 26--58. 
 
Chun, M. M., & Turk-Browne, N. B. (2007). Interactions between attention and memory. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 17(2), 177–184. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2007.03.005 
 
Church, A. (1937). A. M. Turing. On computable numbers, with an application to the 
Entscheidungs problcm. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 2 s. Vol. 42 
(1936–1937), pp. 230–265. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 2(1), 42–43. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S002248120003958X 
 
Ciaglia, F. M., Di Cosmo, F., Ibort, A., & Marmo, G. (2020). Schr\"{o}dinger’s problem 
with cats: Measurements and states in the Groupoid Picture of Quantum Mechanics. 
ArXiv:2012.10284 [Math-Ph, Physics:Quant-Ph]. https://doi.org/10.3390/e22111292 
 
Ciaramelli, E. (2008). The role of ventromedial prefrontal cortex in navigation: A case of 
impaired wayfinding and rehabilitation. Neuropsychologia, 46(7), 2099–2105. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.11.029 
 
Cisek, P. (2019a). Resynthesizing behavior through phylogenetic refinement. Attention, 
Perception, & Psychophysics, 81(7), 2265–2287. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-019-01760-
1 
 
Cisek, P. (2019b). A sensorimotor alternative to coding is possible. The Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 42, e222. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X19001468 
 
Clark, A. (1992). Sensory Qualities. Clarendon Press. 
 
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of 
cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–204. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12000477 
 
Constant, A., Clark, A., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Representation Wars: Enacting an Armistice 
Through Active Inference. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 3798. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.598733 
 
Constantinescu, A. O., O’Reilly, J. X., & Behrens, T. E. J. (2016). Organizing conceptual 
knowledge in humans with a gridlike code. Science, 352(6292), 1464. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf0941 
 
53 
 
Damiani, S., Scalabrini, A., Gomez-Pilar, J., Brondino, N., & Northoff, G. (2019). Increased 
scale-free dynamics in salience network in adult high-functioning autism. NeuroImage: 
Clinical, 21, 101634. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2018.101634 
 
de Pasquale, F., Della Penna, S., Snyder, A. Z., Marzetti, L., Pizzella, V., Romani, G. L., & 
Corbetta, M. (2012). A Cortical Core for Dynamic Integration of Functional Networks in the 
Resting Human Brain. Neuron, 74(4), 753–764. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.03.031 
 
Dennett, D. C. (Daniel Clement). (1987). The intentional stance. Cambridge, Mass. :MIT 
Press, 
 
Descartes, R., 1596-1650. (1993). Discourse on method ; and, Meditations on first 
philosophy. Third edition. Indianapolis : Hackett Pub. Co., [1993] ©1993. 
https://search.library.wisc.edu/catalog/999718190702121 
 
Dinstein, I., Heeger, D. J., & Behrmann, M. (2015). Neural variability: Friend or foe? Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 19(6), 322–328. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2015.04.005 
 
DiSalle, R. (2002). Newton’s philosophical analysis of space and time. In I. B. Cohen & G. 
E. Smith (Eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Newton (pp. 33--56). Cambridge University 
Press. 
 
DiSalle, R. (2006). Understanding Space-Time: The Philosophical Development of Physics 
From Newton to Einstein. Cambridge University Press. 
 
Doeller, C. F., Barry, C., & Burgess, N. (2010). Evidence for grid cells in a human memory 
network. Nature, 463(7281), 657–661. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08704 
 
Dolan, R. J. (2002). Emotion, Cognition, and Behavior. 298, 4. 
 
Dotson, N. M., & Yartsev, M. M. (2021). Nonlocal spatiotemporal representation in the 
hippocampus of freely flying bats. Science (New York, N.Y.), 373(6551), 242–247. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abg1278 
 
Drew, T., Vo, M. L. H., & Wolfe, J. M. (2013). “The invisible gorilla strikes again: Sustained 
inattentional blindness in expert observers”. Psychological Science, 24(9), 1848–1853. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797613479386 
 
Duff, M., & Brown-Schmidt, S. (2012). The hippocampus and the flexible use and processing 
of language. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 69. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00069 
 
Ebbinghaus, H. (2013). Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psychology. Annals of 
Neurosciences, 20(4). https://doi.org/10.5214/ans.0972.7531.200408 
 
Eichenbaum, H. (2004). Hippocampus: Cognitive processes and neural representations that 
underlie declarative memory. Neuron, 44(1), 109–120. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2004.08.028 
 
 
54 
Eichenbaum, H. (2017a). The role of the hippocampus in navigation is memory. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 117(4), 1785–1796. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00005.2017 
 
Eichenbaum, H. (2017b). Prefrontal–hippocampal interactions in episodic memory. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 18(9), 547–558. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2017.74 
 
Eichenbaum, H., & Cohen, N. J. (1988). Representation in the hippocampus: What do 
hippocampal neurons code? Trends in Neurosciences, 11(6), 244–248. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-2236(88)90100-2 
 
Eichenbaum, H., & Cohen, N. J. (2014). Can We Reconcile the Declarative Memory and 
Spatial Navigation Views on Hippocampal Function? Neuron, 83(4), 764–770. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.07.032 
 
Eichenbaum, H., Dudchenko, P., Wood, E., Shapiro, M., & Tanila, H. (1999). The 
Hippocampus, Memory, and Place Cells: Is It Spatial Memory or a Memory Space? Neuron, 
23(2), 209–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80773-4 
 
Eliav, T., Maimon, S. R., Aljadeff, J., Tsodyks, M., Ginosar, G., Las, L., & Ulanovsky, N. 
(2021). Multiscale representation of very large environments in the hippocampus of flying 
bats. Science (New York, N.Y.), 372(6545), eabg4020. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abg4020 
 
Euston, D. R., Gruber, A. J., & McNaughton, B. L. (2012). The Role of Medial Prefrontal 
Cortex in Memory and Decision Making. Neuron, 76(6), 1057–1070. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.12.002 
 
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2008). Dual-Processing Accounts of Reasoning, Judgment, and Social 
Cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59(1), 255–278. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093629 
 
Fazelpour, S., & Thompson, E. (2015). The Kantian brain: Brain dynamics from a 
neurophenomenological perspective. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 31, 223–229. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2014.12.006 
 
Fell, J., & Axmacher, N. (2011). The role of phase synchronization in memory processes. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 12(2), 105–118. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2979 
 
Fox, K. C. R., Spreng, R. N., Ellamil, M., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Christoff, K. (2015). The 
wandering brain: Meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies of mind-wandering and 
related spontaneous thought processes. NeuroImage, 111, 611–621. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.02.039 
 
Frank, L. M., Stanley, G. B., & Brown, E. N. (2004). Hippocampal Plasticity across Multiple 
Days of Exposure to Novel Environments. The Journal of Neuroscience, 24(35), 7681–7689. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1958-04.2004 
 
Frith, C. (2005). The neural basis of hallucinations and delusions. Comptes Rendus Biologies, 
328(2), 169–175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crvi.2004.10.012 
 
 
55 
Gallistel, C. R. (1990). The organization of learning (pp. viii, 648). The MIT Press. 
 
Gallistel, C. R., & King, A. P. (2009). Memory and the computational brain: Why cognitive 
science will transform neuroscience. (pp. xvi, 319). Wiley-Blackwell. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781444310498 
 
Gärdenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual Spaces: The Geometry of Thought. The MIT Press. 
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/2076.001.0001 
 
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems. Houghton Mifflin. 
 
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
 
Giere, R. N. (2004). How Models Are Used to Represent Reality. Philosophy of Science, 
71(5), 742–752. https://doi.org/10.1086/425063 
 
Giere, R. N. (2006). Scientific Perspectivism. University of Chicago Press. 
 
Ginsburg, S., & Jablonka, E. (2019). The evolution of the sensitive soul: Learning and the 
origins of consciousness. (A. Zeligowski, Illustrator).  
 
Goldstein, K. (1995). The organism: A holistic approach to biology derived from 
pathological data in man (p. 422). Zone Books. 
 
Golesorkhi, M., Gomez-Pilar, J., Zilio, F., Berberian, N., Wolff, A., Yagoub, M. C. E., & 
Northoff, G. (2021). The brain and its time: Intrinsic neural timescales are key for input 
processing. Communications Biology, 4(1), 970. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02483-6 
 
Golonka, S., & Wilson, A. D. (2019). Ecological representations. Ecological Psychology, 
31(3), 235–253. https://doi.org/10.1080/10407413.2019.1615224 
 
Greicius, M. D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A. L., & Menon, V. (2003). Functional connectivity in 
the resting brain: A network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 100(1), 253–258. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0135058100 
 
Gustafson, N. J., & Daw, N. D. (2011). Grid Cells, Place Cells, and Geodesic Generalization 
for Spatial Reinforcement Learning. PLoS Computational Biology, 7(10), Article 10. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002235 
 
Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M.-B., & Moser, E. I. (2005). Microstructure of a 
spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. Nature, 436(7052), 801–806.  
 
Hampson, R. E., Simeral, J. D., & Deadwyler, S. A. (1999). Distribution of spatial and 
nonspatial information in dorsal hippocampus. Nature, 402(6762), 610–614. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/45154 
 
Hasson, U., Nastase, S. A., & Goldstein, A. (2020). Direct Fit to Nature: An Evolutionary 
Perspective on Biological and Artificial Neural Networks. Neuron, 105(3), 416–434. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.12.002 
 
56 
 
Hawkins, J., Lewis, M., Klukas, M., Purdy, S., & Ahmad, S. (2018). A Framework for 
Intelligence and Cortical Function Based on Grid Cells in the Neocortex. Frontiers in Neural 
Circuits, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fncir.2018.00121 
 
He, B. J. (2014). Scale-free brain activity: Past, present, and future. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 18(9), 480–487. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.04.003 
 
Hebb, D. O. (1949). The organization of behavior a neuropsychological theory. Wiley. 
http://books.google.com/books?id=fGlqAAAAMAAJ 
 
Heyes, C. (2018). Cognitive gadgets: The cultural evolution of thinking. (p. 292). Harvard 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674985155 
 
Hill, N. J., Gupta, D., Brunner, P., Gunduz, A., Adamo, M. A., Ritaccio, A., & Schalk, G. 
(2012). Recording Human Electrocorticographic (ECoG) Signals for Neuroscientific 
Research and Real-time Functional Cortical Mapping. Journal of Visualized Experiments, 64, 
3993. https://doi.org/10.3791/3993 
 
Hofstadter, D. (2007). I am a strange loop (pp. xix, 412). Basic Books. 
 
Holleman, G. A., Hooge, I. T. C., Kemner, C., & Hessels, R. S. (2021). The Reality of “Real-
Life” Neuroscience: A Commentary on Shamay-Tsoory and Mendelsohn (2019). 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 16(2), 461–465. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691620917354 
 
Huijbers, W., Pennartz, C. M., Cabeza, R., & Daselaar, S. M. (2009). When Learning and 
Remembering Compete: A Functional MRI Study. PLOS Biology, 7(1), e1000011. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1000011 
 
Hurme, P. (2017). We Shape Our Tools, and Thereafter Our Tools Shape Us. Human 
Technology, 13(2), 145–148. https://doi.org/10.17011/ht/urn.201711104209 
 
Hutto, D. (2017). Memory and narrativity. Faculty of Law, Humanities and the Arts - Papers 
(Archive), 192–204. 
 
Hwang, J. W., Xin, S. C., Ou, Y. M., Zhang, W. Y., Liang, Y. L., Chen, J., Yang, X. Q., 
Chen, X. Y., Guo, T. W., Yang, X. J., Ma, W. H., Li, J., Zhao, B. C., Tu, Y., & Kong, J. 
(2016). Enhanced default mode network connectivity with ventral striatum in subthreshold 
depression individuals. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 76, 111–120. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2016.02.005 
 
Jonas, E., & Kording, K. P. (2017). Could a Neuroscientist Understand a Microprocessor? 
PLoS Computational Biology, 13(1), e1005268. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005268 
 
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. 
 
Kentros, C. G., Agnihotri, N. T., Streater, S., Hawkins, R. D., & Kandel, E. R. (2004). 
Increased Attention to Spatial Context Increases Both Place Field Stability and Spatial 
Memory. Neuron, 42(2), 283–295. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(04)00192-8 
 
57 
 
Kiefer, M., & Pulvermüller, F. (2012). Conceptual representations in mind and brain: 
Theoretical developments, current evidence and future directions. Cortex, 48(7), 805–825. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2011.04.006 
 
Kirmayer, L. J., Worthman, C. M., Kitayama, S., Lemelson, R., & Cummings, C. (Eds.). 
(2020). Culture, Mind, and Brain: Emerging Concepts, Models, and Applications (1st ed.). 
Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108695374 
 
Koplenig, A. (2018). Using the parameters of the Zipf–Mandelbrot law to measure diachronic 
lexical, syntactical and stylistic changes – a large-scale corpus analysis. Corpus Linguistics 
and Linguistic Theory, 14(1), 1–34. https://doi.org/10.1515/cllt-2014-0049 
 
Krakauer, J. W., Ghazanfar, A. A., Gomez-Marin, A., MacIver, M. A., & Poeppel, D. (2017). 
Neuroscience Needs Behavior: Correcting a Reductionist Bias. Neuron, 93(3), 480–490. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.12.041 
 
Kriegeskorte, N., & Diedrichsen, J. (2019). Peeling the Onion of Brain Representations. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 42, 407–432. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-
080317-061906 
 
Kubie, J. L., Levy, E. R. J., & Fenton, A. A. (2020). Is hippocampal remapping the 
physiological basis for context? Hippocampus, 30(8), 851–864. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.23160 
Kubie, J. L., & Muller, R. U. (1991). Multiple representations in the hippocampus. 
Hippocampus, 1(3), 240–242. https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.450010305 
 
Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. [Second edition, enlarged]. 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press, [1970]. 
https://search.library.wisc.edu/catalog/999466601902121 
 
Kuhrt, D., St. John, N. R., Bellmund, J. L. S., Kaplan, R., & Doeller, C. F. (2021). An 
immersive first-person navigation task for abstract knowledge acquisition. Scientific Reports, 
11(1), 5612. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-84599-7 
 
Kurczek, J., Brown-Schmidt, S., & Duff, M. C. (2013). Hippocampal contributions to 
language: Evidence of referential processing deficits in amnesia. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology. General, 142(4), 1346–1354. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0034026 
 
Lakatos, P., Karmos, G., Mehta, A., Ulbert, I., & Schroeder, C. (2008). Entrainment of 
Neuronal Oscillations as a Mechanism of Attentional Selection. Science (New York, N.Y.), 
320, 110–113. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1154735 
 
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh: The embodied mind and its 
challenge to Western thought. Basic Books. 
 
Lakoff, G., Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.206.1458 
 
 
58 
Langille, J. J., & Brown, R. E. (2018). The Synaptic Theory of Memory: A Historical Survey 
and Reconciliation of Recent Opposition. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 12, 52. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2018.00052 
 
Lara, A. H., & Wallis, J. D. (2015). The Role of Prefrontal Cortex in Working Memory: A 
Mini Review. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 9, 173. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2015.00173 
 
Llinas, R. (2014). The olivo-cerebellar system: A key to understanding the functional 
significance of intrinsic oscillatory brain properties. Frontiers in Neural Circuits, 7, 96. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fncir.2013.00096 
 
Llinás, R. R. (2001). I of the Vortex: From Neurons to Self. A Bradford Book. 
 
Luczak, A., Barthó, P., Marguet, S. L., Buzsáki, G., & Harris, K. D. (2007). Sequential 
structure of neocortical spontaneous activity in vivo. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 104(1), 347–352. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0605643104 
 
MacKay, D. G., Stewart, R., & Burke, D. M. (1998). H.M. revisited: Relations between 
language comprehension, memory, and the hippocampal system. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 10(3), 377–394. https://doi.org/10.1162/089892998562807 
 
Mahoney, M. J. (1974). Cognition and behavior modification. (pp. xv, 351). Ballinger. 
Marks, L. J., & Michael, J. W. (2001). Science, medicine, and the future: Artificial limbs. 
BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 323(7315), 732–735. PubMed. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.323.7315.732 
 
Mandler, G. (1991). Your face looks familiar but I can't remember your name: A review of 
dual process theory. In W. E. Hockley & S. Lewandowsky (Eds.), Relating theory and data: 
Essays on human memory in honor of Bennet B. Murdock (pp. 207–225). Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc. 
 
Massimi, M. (2018). Four Kinds of Perspectival Truth. Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 96(2), 342–359. https://doi.org/10.1111/phpr.12300 
 
Massimi, M., & McCoy, C. D. (Eds.). (2020). Understanding Perspectivism: Scientific 
Challenges and Methodological Prospects. Taylor & Francis. 
https://library.oapen.org/handle/20.500.12657/25065 
 
Mazoyer, B., Zago, L., Mellet, E., Bricogne, S., Etard, O., Houdé, O., Crivello, F., Joliot, M., 
Petit, L., & Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2001). Cortical networks for working memory and 
executive functions sustain the conscious resting state in man. Brain Research Bulletin, 
54(3), 287–298. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0361-9230(00)00437-8 
 
McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O’Reilly, R. C. (1995). Why there are 
complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the 
successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory. Psychological 
Review, 102(3), 419–457. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419 
 
 
59 
Mcnaughton, B., Barnes, C., Gerrard, J., Gothard, K., Jung, M. W., Knierim, J., HS, K., Qin, 
Y., Skaggs, W., Suster, M., & Weaver, K. (1996). Deciphering the hippocampal polyglot: 
The hippocampus as a path integration system. The Journal of Experimental Biology, 199, 
173–185. 
 
McNaughton, B. L., Battaglia, F. P., Jensen, O., Moser, E. I., & Moser, M.-B. (2006). Path 
integration and the neural basis of the ‘cognitive map’. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7(8), 
663–678. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1932 
 
Menon, V. (2011). Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: A unifying triple 
network model. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(10), 483–506. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.08.003 
 
Michaelian, K., & Sutton, J. (2017). Memory. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2017). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford 
University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2017/entries/memory/ 
 
Milivojevic, B., & Doeller, C. F. (2013a). Mnemonic networks in the hippocampal formation: 
From spatial maps to temporal and conceptual codes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 142(4), 1231–1241. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033746 
 
Milivojevic, B., & Doeller, C. F. (2013b). Mnemonic networks in the hippocampal 
formation: From spatial maps to temporal and conceptual codes. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology. General, 142(4), 1231–1241. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033746 
 
Momennejad, I. (2020). Learning Structures: Predictive Representations, Replay, and 
Generalization. Understanding Memory: Which Level of Analysis?, 32, 155–166. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2020.02.017 
 
Monaco, J. D., Rao, G., Roth, E. D., & Knierim, J. J. (2014). Attentive scanning behavior 
drives one-trial potentiation of hippocampal place fields. Nature Neuroscience, 17(5), 725–
731. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3687 
 
Moon, H.-J., Gauthier, B., Park, H.-D., Faivre, N., & Blanke, O. (2020). Sense of self impacts 
spatial navigation and hexadirectional coding in human entorhinal cortex [Preprint]. 
Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.295246 
 
Moore, E. C., Fisch, M. H., Kloesei, C. J. W., Roberts, D. D., & Ziegler, L. A. (Eds.). (1984). 
Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, Volume 2. Indiana University Press; 
JSTOR. http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt16gh7rt 
 
Morozov, A. (2008). Simplifying experiments with a Mandelbrot set model of the phase 
transition theory. JETP Letters, 86(11), 745–748. 
https://doi.org/10.1134/S0021364007230142 
 
Moser, E. I., Kropff, E., & Moser, M.-B. (2008). Place Cells, Grid Cells, and the Brain’s 
Spatial Representation System. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 31(1), 69–89. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.061307.090723 
 
 
60 
Moser, M.-B., Rowland, D. C., & Moser, E. I. (2015). Place Cells, Grid Cells, and Memory. 
Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology, 7(2), a021808. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a021808 
 
Muller, R. U., & Kubie, J. L. (1987). The effects of changes in the environment on the spatial 
firing of hippocampal complex-spike cells. The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official 
Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 7(7), 1951–1968. 
 
Nadel, L., & Hardt, O. (2011). Update on Memory Systems and Processes. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 36(1), 251–273. https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2010.169 
 
Nakajima, M., Schmitt, L. I., & Halassa, M. M. (2019). Prefrontal Cortex Regulates Sensory 
Filtering through a Basal Ganglia-to-Thalamus Pathway. Neuron, 103(3), 445-458.e10. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.05.026 
 
Nitzan, N., McKenzie, S., Beed, P. et al. Propagation of hippocampal ripples to the neocortex 
by way of a subiculum-retrosplenial pathway. Nat Commun 11, 1947 (2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15787-8 
 
Northoff, G. (2016a). Spatiotemporal psychopathology I: No rest for the brain’s resting state 
activity in depression? Spatiotemporal psychopathology of depressive symptoms. Journal of 
Affective Disorders, 190, 854–866. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2015.05.007 
 
Northoff, G. (2016b). Neuroscience and Whitehead I: Neuro-ecological Model of Brain. 
Axiomathes, 26(3), 219–252. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10516-016-9286-2 
 
Northoff, G. (2018a). The brain’s spontaneous activity and its psychopathological symptoms 
– “Spatiotemporal binding and integration”. Neuroimaging in Psychiatry: Steps toward the 
Clinical Application of Brain Imaging in Psychiatric Disorders, 80, 81–90. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnpbp.2017.03.019 
 
Northoff, G. (2018b). The Spontaneous Brain: From the Mind-Body to the World-Brain 
Problem. MIT Press. 
 
Northoff, G., & Bermpohl, F. (2004). Cortical midline structures and the self. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 8(3), 102–107. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2004.01.004 
 
Northoff, G., Duncan, N. W., & Hayes, D. J. (2010). The brain and its resting state activity—
Experimental and methodological implications. Progress in Neurobiology, 92(4), 593–600. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.09.002 
 
Northoff, G., & Huang, Z. (2017). How do the brain’s time and space mediate consciousness 
and its different dimensions? Temporo-spatial theory of consciousness (TTC). Neuroscience 
& Biobehavioral Reviews, 80, 630–645. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.07.013 
 
Northoff, G., & Stanghellini, G. (2016). How to Link Brain and Experience? Spatiotemporal 
Psychopathology of the Lived Body. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10, 76. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00172 
 
 
61 
Northoff, G., Wainio-Theberge, S., & Evers, K. (2020a). Is temporo-spatial dynamics the 
“common currency” of brain and mind? In Quest of “Spatiotemporal Neuroscience”. Physics 
of Life Reviews, 33, 34–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2019.05.002 
 
Northoff, G., Wainio-Theberge, S., & Evers, K. (2020b). Spatiotemporal neuroscience – what 
is it and why we need it. Physics of Life Reviews, 33, 78–87. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2020.06.005 
 
O’Keefe, J., & Burgess, N. (1996). Geometric determinants of the place fields of 
hippocampal neurons. Nature, 381(6581), 425–428. https://doi.org/10.1038/381425a0 
 
O’Keefe, J., & Dostrovsky, J. (1971). The hippocampus as a spatial map. Preliminary 
evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat. Brain Research, 34(1), 171–175. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-8993(71)90358-1 
 
O’Keefe, J., & Krupic, J. (2021). Do hippocampal pyramidal cells respond to nonspatial 
stimuli? Physiological Reviews, 101(3), 1427–1456. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00014.2020 
 
O’Keefe, J., & Nadel, L. (1978). The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. https://repository.arizona.edu/handle/10150/620894 
 
Ólafsdóttir, H. F., Bush, D., & Barry, C. (2018). The Role of Hippocampal Replay in 
Memory and Planning. Current Biology, 28(1), R37–R50. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.10.073 
 
Ortiz-Catalan, M., Mastinu, E., Sassu, P., Aszmann, O., & Brånemark, R. (2020). Self-
Contained Neuromusculoskeletal Arm Prostheses. New England Journal of Medicine, 
382(18), 1732–1738. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1917537 
 
Owen, L. L. W., et al. (2021) High-level cognition during story listening is reflected in high-
order dynamic correlations in neural activity patterns. Nature Communications. 
doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25876-x. 
 
Penfield, W. (1952). MEMORY MECHANISMS. Archives of Neurology And Psychiatry, 
67(2), 178. https://doi.org/10.1001/archneurpsyc.1952.02320140046005 
 
Poeppel, D., & Adolfi, F. (2020). Against the Epistemological Primacy of the Hardware: The 
Brain from Inside Out, Turned Upside Down. ENeuro, 7(4), Article 4. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0215-20.2020 
 
Poldrack, R. (2017). Neuroscience: The risks of reading the brain. Nature, 541(7636), 156–
156. https://doi.org/10.1038/541156a 
 
Putman, R. J., & Wratten, S. D. (1983). Principles of Ecology. Springer Netherlands. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-6948-6 
 
Qin, J., Chen, S.-G., Hu, D., Zeng, L.-L., Fan, Y.-M., Chen, X.-P., & Shen, H. (2015). 
Predicting individual brain maturity using dynamic functional connectivity. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 9, 418. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00418 
 
62 
 
Qin, P., & Northoff, G. (2011). How is our self related to midline regions and the default-
mode network? NeuroImage, 57(3), 1221–1233. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.028 
 
Quammen, D. (2018). The tangled tree: A radical new history of life (First Simon&Schuster 
hardcover edition.). Simon & Schuster. 
 
Rabinowitch, I., Laurent, P., Zhao, B., Walker, D., Beets, I., Schoofs, L., Bai, J., Schafer, W. 
R., & Treinin, M. (2016). Neuropeptide-Driven Cross-Modal Plasticity following Sensory 
Loss in Caenorhabditis elegans. PLOS Biology, 14(1), e1002348. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002348 
 
Raichle, M. E. (2011). The Restless Brain. Brain Connectivity, 1(1), 3–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2011.0019 
 
Raichle, M. E. (2015). The brain’s default mode network. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 
38, 433–447. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-071013-014030 
 
Ranck, J. B. (1973). Studies on single neurons in dorsal hippocampal formation and septum 
in unrestrained rats: Part I. Behavioral correlates and firing repertoires. Experimental 
Neurology, 41(2), 462–531. https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-4886(73)90290-2 
 
Read, C., & Szokolszky, A. (2020). Ecological Psychology and Enactivism: Perceptually-
Guided Action vs. Sensation-Based Enaction. Frontiers in psychology, 11, 1270. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01270 
 
Rescher, N. (1991). G. W. Leibniz’s Monadology. University of Pittsburgh Press; JSTOR. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt6wrc4t 
 
Roediger, H. L. (1980). Memory metaphors in cognitive psychology. Memory & Cognition, 
8(3), 231–246. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03197611 
 
Rorty, R. (1999). Philosophy and Social Hope. Penguin Books. 
 
Rouault, M., Seow, T., Gillan, C. M., & Fleming, S. M. (2018). Psychiatric Symptom 
Dimensions Are Associated With Dissociable Shifts in Metacognition but Not Task 
Performance. Biological Psychiatry, 84(6), 443–451. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.12.017 
 
Russo, A. A., Khajeh, R., Bittner, S. R., Perkins, S. M., Cunningham, J. P., Abbott, L. F., & 
Churchland, M. M. (2020). Neural Trajectories in the Supplementary Motor Area and Motor 
Cortex Exhibit Distinct Geometries, Compatible with Different Classes of Computation. 
Neuron, 107(4), 745-758.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.05.020 
 
Ryan, K. J., & Gallagher, S. (2020). Between Ecological Psychology and Enactivism: Is 
There Resonance? Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1147. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01147 
 
Ryle, G. (1949). The Concept of Mind (Issue 234, pp. 23–37). Hutchinson & Co. 
 
63 
 
Sautoy, M. du. (2019, March 9). Can AI become conscious? Bach, Escher and Gödel’s 
‘strange loops’ may have the answer. The Guardian. 
https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2019/mar/09/bach-escher-godel-douglas-hofstadter-
consciousness-ai-revolution-mathematical-idea-art-music 
 
Schapiro, A. C., Turk-Browne, N. B., Botvinick, M. M., & Norman, K. A. (2017). 
Complementary learning systems within the hippocampus: A neural network modelling 
approach to reconciling episodic memory with statistical learning. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 372(1711), 20160049. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0049 
 
Schiller, D., Eichenbaum, H., Buffalo, E. A., Davachi, L., Foster, D. J., Leutgeb, S., & 
Ranganath, C. (2015). Memory and Space: Towards an Understanding of the Cognitive Map. 
The Journal of Neuroscience, 35(41), 13904–13911. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2618-15.2015 
 
Schläpfer, Markus & Dong, Lei & O'Keeffe, Kevin & Santi, Paolo & Szell, Michael & Salat, 
Hadrien & Anklesaria, Samuel & Vazifeh, Mohammad & Ratti, Carlo & West, Geoffrey. 
(2021). The universal visitation law of human mobility. Nature. 593. 522-527. 
10.1038/s41586-021-03480-9. 
 
Schlosser, G. (2018). A Short History of Nearly Every Sense—The Evolutionary History of 
Vertebrate Sensory Cell Types. Integrative and Comparative Biology, 58(2), 301–316. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/icb/icy024 
 
Schmitzer-Torbert, N., & Redish, A. D. (2004). Neuronal activity in the rodent dorsal 
striatum in sequential navigation: Separation of spatial and reward responses on the multiple 
T task. Journal of Neurophysiology, 91(5), 2259–2272. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00687.2003 
 
Scoville, W. B., & Milner, B. (1957). Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal 
lesions. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 20(1), 11–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.20.1.11 
 
Serrano, B., Baños, R. M., & Botella, C. (2016). Virtual reality and stimulation of touch and 
smell for inducing relaxation: A randomized controlled trial. Computers in Human Behavior, 
55, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.08.007 
 
Seth, A. (2018). Being a beast machine: The origins of selfhood in control-oriented 
interoceptive inference [Preprint]. PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/vg5da 
 
Shamay-Tsoory, S. G., & Mendelsohn, A. (2019). Real-Life Neuroscience: An Ecological 
Approach to Brain and Behavior Research. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 14(5), 
841–859. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691619856350 
 
Sherry, D. F., & Schacter, D. L. (1987). The evolution of multiple memory systems. In K. 
Pawlik & M. Rosenzweig (Eds.), International Handbook of Psychology. 
 
Shin, J. N., Doron, G., & Larkum, M. E. (2021). Memories off the top of your head. Science 
(New York, N.Y.), 374(6567), 538–539. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abk1859 
 
64 
 
Smetacek, V., & Mechsner, F. (2004). Making sense. Nature, 432(7013), 21–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/432021a 
 
Smolin, L. (2018). The dynamics of difference. Foundations of Physics, 48(2), 121–134. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-018-0141-8 
 
Spiers H. J. (2008). Keeping the goal in mind: prefrontal contributions to spatial 
navigation. Neuropsychologia, 46(7), 2106–2108. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.01.028 
 
Squire, L. R. (2009). The Legacy of Patient H.M. for Neuroscience. Neuron, 61(1), 6–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2008.12.023 
 
Stanghellini, G., Ballerini, M., Presenza, S., Mancini, M., Northoff, G., & Cutting, J. (2017). 
Abnormal Time Experiences in Major Depression: An Empirical Qualitative Study. 
Psychopathology, 50(2), 125–140. https://doi.org/10.1159/000452892 
 
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual differences in reasoning: Implications for 
the rationality debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23(5), 645–665. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00003435 
 
Stefanics, G., Hangya, B., Hernádi, I., Winkler, I., Lakatos, P., & Ulbert, I. (2010). Phase 
Entrainment of Human Delta Oscillations Can Mediate the Effects of Expectation on 
Reaction Speed. The Journal of Neuroscience, 30(41), 13578–13585. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0703-10.2010 
 
Studies, C. S. S., & Peirce. (1883). Studies in Logic. By Members of the Johns Hopkins 
University. 
 
Taube, J. S., Muller, R. U., & Ranck, J. B., Jr (1990). Head-direction cells recorded from the 
postsubiculum in freely moving rats. I. Description and quantitative analysis. The Journal of 
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 10(2), 420–435. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.10-02-00420.1990 
 
Tang, W., Shin, J. D., & Jadhav, S. P. (2021). Multiple time-scales of decision-making in the 
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. ELife, 10, e66227. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.66227 
 
Theves, S., Fernández, G., & Doeller, C. F. (2020). The Hippocampus Maps Concept Space, 
Not Feature Space. The Journal of Neuroscience, 40(38), 7318. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0494-20.2020 
 
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. 
Harvard University Press. 
 
Tierney, A. L., & Nelson, C. A. (2009). Brain Development and the Role of Experience in the 
Early Years. Zero to Three, 30(2), 9–13. 
 
Tolman, E. C. (1922). A New Formula for Behaviorism. Psychological Review, 29(1), 44–53. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/h0070289 
 
65 
 
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychological Review, 55(4), 189–
208. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0061626 
 
Topalovic, U., Aghajan, Z. M., Villaroman, D., Hiller, S., Christov-Moore, L., Wishard, T. J., 
Stangl, M., Hasulak, N. R., Inman, C. S., Fields, T. A., Rao, V. R., Eliashiv, D., Fried, I., & 
Suthana, N. (2020). Wireless Programmable Recording and Stimulation of Deep Brain 
Activity in Freely Moving Humans. Neuron, 108(2), 322-334.e9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2020.08.021 
 
Tromp, J., Peeters, D., Meyer, A. S., & Hagoort, P. (2018). The combined use of virtual 
reality and EEG to study language processing in naturalistic environments. Behavior 
Research Methods, 50(2), 862–869. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-017-0911-9 
 
Tse D, Langston RF, Kakeyama M, Bethus I, Spooner PA, Wood ER, Witter MP, Morris RG. 
Schemas and memory consolidation. Science. (2007) Apr 6;316(5821):76-82. doi: 
10.1126/science.1135935. PMID: 17412951. 
 
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. Clarendon Press ; Oxford University Press. 
 
Turing, A. M. (1937). On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the 
Entscheidungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, s2-42(1), 230–265. 
https://doi.org/10.1112/plms/s2-42.1.230 
 
Tzilivaki, A., Kastellakis, G., Schmitz, D., & Poirazi, P. (2021). GABAergic Interneurons 
with Nonlinear Dendrites: From Neuronal Computations to Memory Engrams. Neuroscience, 
S0306-4522(21)00593-5. Advance online publication. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2021.11.033 
 
Uddin, L. Q., Clare Kelly, A. M., Biswal, B. B., Xavier Castellanos, F., & Milham, M. P. 
(2008). Functional connectivity of default mode network components: Correlation, 
anticorrelation, and causality. Human Brain Mapping, 30(2), 625–637. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20531 
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and 
human experience (pp. xx, 308). The MIT Press. 
 
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (2017). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and 
human experience. 
 
Vertes, R. P. (2006). Interactions among the medial prefrontal cortex, hippocampus and 
midline thalamus in emotional and cognitive processing in the rat. Neuroscience, 142(1), 1–
20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.06.027 
 
Vorhees, C. V., & Williams, M. T. (2014). Assessing spatial learning and memory in rodents. 
ILAR Journal, 55(2), 310–332. PubMed. https://doi.org/10.1093/ilar/ilu013 
 
Waschke, L., Kloosterman, N. A., Obleser, J., & Garrett, D. D. (2021). Behavior needs neural 
variability. Neuron, 109(5), 751–766. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2021.01.023 
 
 
66 
Weil, L. G., Fleming, S. M., Dumontheil, I., Kilford, E. J., Weil, R. S., Rees, G., Dolan, R. J., 
& Blakemore, S.-J. (2013). The development of metacognitive ability in adolescence. 
Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1), 264–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2013.01.004 
 
Wells, A. J. (2002). Gibson’s Affordances and Turing’s Theory of Computation. Ecological 
Psychology, 14(3), 140–180. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15326969ECO1403_3 
 
Wells, A. J. (2004). Cognitive Science and the Turing Machine: An Ecological Perspective. 
In C. Teuscher (Ed.), Alan Turing: Life and Legacy of a Great Thinker (pp. 271–292). 
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-05642-4_11 
 
Weick, K. (1995). Sensemaking in Organisations. London: Sage. 
 
Whittington, J. C., Muller, T. H., Mark, S., Chen, G., Barry, C., Burgess, N., & Behrens, T. 
E. (2019). The Tolman-Eichenbaum Machine: Unifying space and relational memory through 
generalisation in the hippocampal formation. BioRxiv, 770495. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/770495 
 
Whittington, J. C. R., Muller, T. H., Mark, S., Chen, G., Barry, C., Burgess, N., & Behrens, 
T. E. J. (2020). The Tolman-Eichenbaum Machine: Unifying Space and Relational Memory 
through Generalization in the Hippocampal Formation. Cell, 183(5), 1249-1263.e23. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.024 
 
Wilbur, H. M. (1980). Complex Life Cycles. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 
11(1), 67–93. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.11.110180.000435 
 
Wilson, B., Finley, C., Lawson, D., & Zerbi, M. (1997). Temporal representations with 
cochlear implants. Am J Otol, 18(6 Suppl), S30-4. PubMed. 
 
Wilson, M. A., & McNaughton, B. L. (1993). Dynamics of the hippocampal ensemble code 
for space. Science (New York, N.Y.), 261(5124), 1055–1058. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.8351520 
 
Wimmer, R. D., Schmitt, L. I., Davidson, T. J., Nakajima, M., Deisseroth, K., & Halassa, M. 
M. (2015). Thalamic control of sensory selection in divided attention. Nature, 526(7575), 
705–709. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15398 
 
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations (Vol. 17, Issue 69, p. 362). Wiley-
Blackwell. 
 
Wolff, A., Di Giovanni, D. A., Gómez-Pilar, J., Nakao, T., Huang, Z., Longtin, A., & 
Northoff, G. (2019). The temporal signature of self: Temporal measures of resting-state EEG 
predict self-consciousness. Human Brain Mapping, 40(3), 789–803. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.24412 
 
Wood, E. R., Dudchenko, P. A., & Eichenbaum, H. (1999). The global record of memory in 
hippocampal neuronal activity. Nature, 397(6720), 613–616. https://doi.org/10.1038/17605 
 
 
67 
Wu, C. M., Schulz, E., Garvert, M. M., Meder, B., & Schuck, N. W. (2020). Similarities and 
differences in spatial and non-spatial cognitive maps. PLOS Computational Biology, 16(9), 
e1008149. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008149 
 
Xue, S.-W., Li, D., Weng, X.-C., Northoff, G., & Li, D.-W. (2014). Different Neural 
Manifestations of Two Slow Frequency Bands in Resting Functional Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging: A Systemic Survey at Regional, Interregional, and Network Levels. Brain 
Connectivity, 4(4), 242–255. https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2013.0182 
 
Yuste, R., MacLean, J. N., Smith, J., & Lansner, A. (2005). The cortex as a central pattern 
generator. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 6(6), 477–483. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1686 
 
Zeithamova, D., & Bowman, C. R. (2020). Generalization and the hippocampus: More than 
one story? Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 175, 107317. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nlm.2020.107317 
 
Zimnik, A. J., & Churchland, M. M. (2021). Independent generation of sequence elements by 
motor cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 24(3), 412–424. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-021-
00798-5 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 
Cognitive Neuroscience  
 
 
CN 
Default Mode Network 
 
 
DMN 
Global Positioning System 
 
 
GPS 
Hippocampal-entorhinal formation   
HEF 
Nervous system 
 
 
 
NS 
Spatiotemporal neuroscience   
 
SN 
System 1 
 
 
 
 
S1 
System 2 
 
 
 
 
S2 
System 3 
 
 
 
 
S3 
Tolman Eichenbaum Machine 
 
TEM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
View publication stats
