 
ARTICLE 29  DATA PROTECTION WORKING PARTY 
 
 
 
 
 
This Working Party was set up under Article 29 of Directive 95/46/EC. It is an independent European advisory body on data 
protection and privacy. Its tasks are described in Article 30 of Directive 95/46/EC and Article 15 of Directive 2002/58/EC. 
 
The secretariat is provided by Directorate C (Fundamental Rights and Union Citizenship) of the European Commission, 
Directorate General Justice, B-1049 Brussels, Belgium, Office No MO-59 02/013. 
 
Website: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/index_en.htm   
 
00461/13/EN 
WP 202 
 
Opinion 02/2013 on apps on smart devices 
 
Adopted on 27 February 2013 
2 
 
Summary  
 
There are hundreds of thousands of different apps available from a range of app stores for 
each popular type of smart device. It has been reported that more than 1,600 new apps are 
added to app stores daily. An average smartphone user is reported to download 37 apps. Apps 
may be offered for little or no upfront cost to the end user and can have a user base of just a 
few individuals or many millions. 
 
Apps are able to collect large quantities data from the device (e.g. data stored on the device by 
the user and data from different sensors, including location) and process these in order to 
provide new and innovative services to the end user. However, these same data sources can be 
further processed, typically to provide a revenue stream, in a manner which may be unknown 
or unwanted by the end user.  
 
App developers unaware of the data protection requirements may create significant risks to 
the private life and reputation of users of smart devices. The key data protection risks to end 
users are the lack of transparency and awareness of the types of processing an app may 
undertake combined with a lack of meaningful consent from end users before that processing 
takes place. Poor security measures, an apparent trend towards data maximisation and the 
elasticity of purposes for which personal data are being collected further contribute to the data 
protection risks found within the current app environment.  
 
A high risk to data protection also stems from the degree of fragmentation between the many 
players in the app development landscape. They include: app developers; app owners; app 
stores; Operating System and device manufacturers (OS and device manufacturers); and other 
third parties that may be involved in the collection and processing of personal data from smart 
devices, such as analytics and advertising providers. Most conclusions and recommendations 
in this Opinion are aimed at app developers (in that they have the greatest control over the 
precise manner in which the processing is undertaken or information presented within the 
app), but often, in order for them to achieve the highest standards of privacy and data 
protection, they have to collaborate with other parties in the app ecosystem. This is 
particularly important with regard to security, where the chain of multiple actors is only as 
strong as its weakest link. 
 
Many types of data available on a smart mobile device are personal data. The relevant legal 
framework is the Data Protection Directive, in combination with the protection of mobile 
devices as part of the private sphere of users contained in the ePrivacy Directive. These rules 
apply to any app targeted to app users within the EU, regardless of the location of the app 
developer or app store. 
 
In this opinion the Working Party clarifies the legal framework applicable to the processing of 
personal data in the development, distribution and usage of apps on smart devices, with a 
focus on the consent requirement, the principles of purpose limitation and data minimisation, 
the need to take adequate security measures, the obligation to correctly inform end users, their 
rights, reasonable retention periods and specifically, fair processing of data collected from and 
about children. 
 
3 
 
 
Contents 
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................ 4 
2. Data protection risks ............................................................................................................................................... 5 
3 Data protection principles ....................................................................................................................................... 7 
3.1 Applicable law .............................................................................................................................................7 
3.2 Personal data processed by apps .................................................................................................................8 
3.3 Parties involved in the data processing .......................................................................................................9 
3.3.1 App developers ............................................................................................................................... 9 
3.3.2 OS and device manufacturers ....................................................................................................... 10 
3.3.3 App stores ..................................................................................................................................... 11 
3.3.4 Third parties ................................................................................................................................. 12 
3.4 Legal ground .............................................................................................................................................14 
3.4.1 Consent prior to installation and processing of personal data ...................................................... 14 
3.4.2 Legal grounds for data processing during usage of the app ......................................................... 16 
3.5 Purpose limitation and data minimisation .................................................................................................17 
3.6 Security .....................................................................................................................................................18 
3.7 Information ................................................................................................................................................22 
3.7.1 The obligation to inform and the content required ....................................................................... 22 
3.7.2 The form of the information ......................................................................................................... 23 
3.8 Data subject's rights ...................................................................................................................................24 
3.9 Retention periods .......................................................................................................................................25 
3.10 Children ...................................................................................................................................................26 
4 Conclusions and recommendations ....................................................................................................................... 27 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Apps are software applications often designed for a specific task and targeted at a particular 
set of smart devices such as smartphones, tablet computers and internet connected televisions. 
They organise information in a way suitable for the specific characteristics of the device and 
they often closely interact with the hardware and operating system features present on the 
devices.  
 
There are hundreds of thousands of different apps available from a range of app stores for 
each popular smart device type. Apps serve a wide range of purposes including web browsing, 
communication (e-mail, telephony and internet messaging), entertainment (games, 
movies/video and music), social networking, banking and location based services. It has been 
reported that more than 1,600 new apps are added to app stores daily.1 An average smartphone 
user will download 37 apps.2 Apps may be offered for little or no upfront cost to the end user 
and can have a user base of just a few individuals or many millions.  
 
The underlying operating system will also include software or data structures that are 
important for the core services of the smart device, for example, the address book of a 
smartphone. The operating system is designed to make these components available to apps 
through Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). Those APIs offer access to the multitude 
of sensors which may be present on smart devices. Such sensors include: a gyroscope, digital 
compass and accelerometer to provide speed and direction of movement; front and rear 
cameras to acquire video and photographs; and a microphone to record audio. Smart devices 
may also contain proximity sensors.3 Smart devices may also connect through a multitude of 
network interfaces including Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, NFC or Ethernet. Finally, an accurate location 
can be determined through geolocation services (as described in WP29 Opinion 13/2011 on 
Geolocation services on smart mobile devices4). The type, accuracy and frequency of these 
sensor data varies by device and the operating system.  
 
Through the API, app developers are able to collect such data continuously, access and write 
contact data, send email, SMS or social network messages, read/modify/delete SD card 
contents, record audio, use the camera and access stored pictures, read the phone state and 
identity, modify the global system settings and prevent the phone from sleeping. APIs can also 
provide information relating to the device itself through one or more unique identifiers and 
information about other installed apps. These data sources can be further processed, typically 
to provide a revenue stream, in a manner which may be unknown or unwanted by the end 
user.  
The objective of this opinion is to clarify the legal framework applicable to the processing of 
personal data in the distribution and usage of apps on smart devices and to consider further 
                                                        
1  Report 
in 
ConceivablyTech 
of 
19 
August 
2012, 
available 
at 
www.conceivablytech  
com/10283/business/apple-app-store-to-reach-1mapps-this-year-sort-of. Quoted by Kamala D. Harris, 
Attorney General California Department of Justice, Privacy on the go, Recommendations for the mobile 
ecosystem, January 2013, http://oag.ca.gov/sites/all/files/pdfs/privacy/privacy_on_the_go.pdf  
2  This is a worldwide estimate for 2012 by ABI Research, http://www.abiresearch.com/press/smartphone-
users-worldwide-will-download-37-apps-o  
3  A sensor that can detect the presence of a physical object without physical contact. See: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2012/WD-proximity-20121206/ 
 
4  See WP29 Opinion 13/2011 on Geolocation services on smart mobile devices (May 2011), 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2011/wp185_en.pdf. 
5 
 
processing which might take place outside of the app, such as using the collected data to build 
profiles and target users. The opinion analyses the key data protection risks, provides a 
description of the different parties involved and highlights the various legal responsibilities. 
This includes: app developers; app owners; app stores; device and Operating System 
manufacturers (OS and device manufacturers); and other third parties that may be involved in 
the collection and processing of personal data from smart devices, such as analytics and 
advertising providers.  
 
The opinion focuses on the consent requirement, the principles of purpose limitation and data 
minimisation, the need to take adequate security measures, the obligation to correctly inform 
end users, their rights, reasonable retention periods and specifically, fair processing of data 
collected from and about children. 
 
The scope is applicable to many different types of smart devices but particularly focussed 
towards apps available for smart mobile devices. 
2. Data protection risks 
 
The close interaction with the operating system allows apps to access significantly more data 
than a traditional internet browser.5 Apps are able to collect large quantities of data from the 
device (location data, data stored on the device by the user and data from the different 
sensors) and process these in order to provide new and innovative services to the end user.  
 
A high risk to data protection comes from the degree of fragmentation between the many 
players in the app development landscape. A single data item can, in real time, be transmitted 
from the device to be processed across the globe or be copied between chains of third-parties. 
Some of the best known apps are developed by major technology companies but many others 
are designed by small start-ups. A single programmer with an idea and little or no prior 
programming skills can reach a global audience in a short space of time. App developers 
unaware of the data protection requirements may create significant risks to the private life and 
reputation of users of smart devices. Simultaneously, third-party services such as advertising 
are developing rapidly, which, if integrated by an app developer without due regard, may 
disclose significant amounts of personal data.  
 
The key data protection risks to end users are the lack of transparency and awareness of the 
types of processing an app may undertake combined with a lack of meaningful consent from 
end users before that processing takes place. Poor security measures, an apparent trend 
towards data maximisation and the elasticity of purposes for which personal data are being 
collected further contribute to the data protection risks found within the current app 
environment. Many of these risks have already been examined and addressed by other 
international regulators, such as the US Federal Trade Commission, the Canadian Office of 
the Privacy Commissioner and the Attorney General of the Californian Department of 
Justice.6 
                                                        
5  Although desktop web browsers are gaining wider access to sensory data on end user devices, driven by web 
game developers. 
6  See, amongst others, FTC staff report Mobile Privacy Disclosures, Building Trust Through Transparency, 
February 2013, http://www.ftc.gov/os/2013/02/130201mobileprivacyreport.pdf, FTC staff report Mobile 
Apps 
for 
Kids: 
Current 
Privacy 
Disclosures 
are 
Disappointing, 
Feb. 
2012, 
 
6 
 
 
 A key data protection risk is the lack of transparency. App developers are constrained 
by the features made available by Operating System manufacturers and app stores to 
ensure comprehensive information is made available, at a relevant time, to the end 
user. However, not all app developers take advantage of these features as many apps 
do not have a privacy policy or fail to inform their potential users in a meaningful way 
about the type of personal data the app may process and for what purposes. The lack 
of transparency is not limited to free apps or those owned by inexperienced developers 
as a recent study reported that just 61.3% of the top 150 apps provided a privacy 
policy.7  
 
 The lack of transparency is closely related to a lack of free and informed consent. 
Once the app is downloaded, consent is often reduced to a tick box indicating that the 
end user accepts the terms and conditions, without even offering a 'No thank you' 
option. According to a GSMA study from September 2011, 92% of app users want to 
have a more granular choice.8 
 
 Poor security measures may lead to unauthorised processing of (sensitive) personal 
data, for example if an app developer suffers a personal data breach or if the app itself 
leaks personal data. 
 
 Another data protection risk is related to disregard (due to ignorance or intention) for 
the principle of purpose limitation which requires that personal data may only be 
collected and processed for specific and legitimate purposes. Personal data collected 
by apps may be widely distributed to a number of third parties for undefined or elastic 
purposes such as 'market research'. The same alarming disregard is shown for the 
principle of data minimisation. Recent research showed that many apps abundantly 
collect data from smartphones, without any meaningful relationship to the apparent 
functionality of the app.9  
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                             
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2012/02/120216mobile_apps_kids.pdf  and follow-up report, Mobile Apps for Kids:  
Disclosures 
Still 
Not 
Making 
the 
Grade, 
December 
2012, 
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2012/12/121210mobilekidsappreport.pdf, 
Canadian 
Offices 
of 
the 
Privacy 
Commissioners, Seizing Opportunity: Good Privacy Practices for Developing Mobile Apps, October 2012, 
http://www.priv.gc.ca/information/pub/gd_app_201210_e.pdf, 
Kamala 
D. 
Harris, 
Attorney 
General 
California Department of Justice, Privacy on the go, Recommendations for the mobile ecosystem, January 
2013, http://oag.ca.gov/sites/all/files/pdfs/privacy/privacy_on_the_go.pdf  
7  FPF June 2012 Mobile Apps study, http://www.futureofprivacy.org/wp-content/uploads/Mobile-Apps-Study-
June-2012.pdf 
8  "89% [of users] think it important to know when their personal information is being shared by an application 
and to be able to turn this off or on." Source: User perspectives on mobile privacy, September 2011,  
http://www.gsma.com/publicpolicy/wp-
content/uploads/2012/03/futuresightuserperspectivesonuserprivacy.pdf  
9  Wall Street Journal, Your Apps Are Watching You, 
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704694004576020083703574602.html  
7 
 
3 Data protection principles 
3.1 Applicable law  
 
The relevant EU legal framework is the Data Protection Directive (95/46/EC). It applies in 
any case where the use of apps on smart devices involves processing personal data of 
individuals. To identify applicable law, it is essential to first identify the role of the different 
stakeholders involved: the identification of the controller(s) of the processing carried out via 
mobile apps is particularly crucial in relation to applicable law. The establishment of the 
controller is a decisive element to trigger application of EU data protection law, although it is 
not the only criterion. According to Article 4.1.(a) of the Data Protection Directive, the 
national law of a Member State is applicable to all processing of personal data carried out "in 
the context of an establishment" of the controller on the territory of that Member State. 
Pursuant to Article 4.1(c) of the Data Protection Directive, the national law of a Member State 
is also applicable in cases where the controller is not established on Community territory and 
makes use of equipment situated on the territory of that Member State. Since the device is 
instrumental in the processing of personal data from and about the user, this criterion is 
usually fulfilled.10 However, this is only relevant where the controller is not established in the 
EU. 
 
As a result, whenever a party involved in the development, distribution and operation of apps 
is deemed to be a controller, such a party is responsible, alone or jointly with others, for 
ensuring compliance with all the requirements set forth under the Data Protection Directive. 
The identification of the role of the parties involved in mobile apps will be further analysed 
below in section 3.3. 
 
Additionally to the Data Protection Directive, the ePrivacy directive (2002/58/EC, as revised 
by 2009/136/EC), sets a specific standard for all parties worldwide that wish to store or access 
information stored in the devices of users in the European Economic Area (EEA).  
 
Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy directive prescribes that the storing of information, or the gaining 
of access to information already stored, in the terminal equipment of a subscriber or user is 
only allowed on condition that the subscriber or user concerned has given his or her consent, 
having been provided with clear and comprehensive information, in accordance with 
Directive 95/46/EC, inter alia about the purposes of the processing. (…) 
 
While many provisions of the ePrivacy directive apply only to providers of publicly available 
electronic communication services and providers of public communication networks in the 
Community, Article 5(3) applies to every entity that places on or reads information from smart 
devices. It applies without regard to the nature of the entity (i.e. whether public or private, an 
individual programmer or a major corporation or whether it is a data controller, data processor 
or a third party).  
 
The consent requirement of Article 5(3) applies to any information, without regard to the 
nature of the data being stored or accessed. The scope is not limited to personal data; 
information can be any type of data stored on the device.  
                                                        
10  To the extent that the app generates traffic with personal data to data controllers. This criterion might not be 
fulfilled if the data are only processed locally, in the device itself. 
8 
 
 
The consent requirement from Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy directive applies to services offered 
'in the Community', that is, to all individuals living in the European Economic Area, regardless 
of the location of the service provider. It is important for app developers to know that both 
directives are imperative laws in that the individual’s rights are non-transferable and not 
subject to contractual waiver. This means that the applicability of European privacy law 
cannot be excluded by a unilateral declaration or contractual agreement.11  
 
3.2 Personal data processed by apps 
 
Many types of data stored on or generated by a smart device are personal data. According to 
Recital 24 of the ePrivacy directive:  
 
"Terminal equipment of users of electronic communications networks and any 
information stored on such equipment are part of the private sphere of the users 
requiring protection under the European Convention for the Protection of Human 
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms." 
 
They are personal data whenever they relate to an individual, who is directly (such as by 
name) or indirectly identifiable to the controller or to a third party. They may relate to the 
owner of the device or to any other individual, such as the contact details of friends in an 
address book.12 Data can be collected and processed on the device or, once transferred, 
elsewhere, on app developers’ or third parties' infrastructure, via connection to an external 
API, in real-time without the knowledge of the end user.  
 
Examples of such personal data that can have a significant impact on the private lives of the 
users and other individuals are: 
- 
Location 
- 
Contacts 
- 
Unique device and customer identifiers (such as IMEI13, IMSI14, UDID15  and mobile 
phone number) 
- 
Identity of the data subject 
- 
Identity of the phone (i.e. name of the phone16) 
- 
Credit card and payment data 
- 
Phone call logs, SMS or instant messaging  
- 
Browsing history 
- 
Email 
- 
Information society service authentication credentials (especially services with social 
features)  
                                                        
11  For instance, statements that only a law of a jurisdiction outside of the EEA applies. 
12  Data can be (i) automatically generated by the device, on the basis of features pre-determined by the OS 
and/or device manufacturer or by the relevant mobile telephony provider (e.g. geolocation data, network 
settings, IP address); (ii) generated by the user through apps (contact lists; notes, photos); (iii) generated by 
the apps (e.g. browsing history) 
13  International Mobile Equipment Identity 
14  International Mobile Subscriber Identity 
15  Unique Device Identifier 
16  Users tend to name their phone with their real name: “John Doe’s iPhone”.  
9 
 
- 
Pictures and videos 
- 
Biometrics (eg facial recognition and fingerprint templates) 
3.3 Parties involved in the data processing 
 
Many different parties are involved in the development, distribution and operation of apps and 
each of which can have different data protection responsibilities.  
 
There are four main parties which can be identified. These are: (i) the app developers 
(including app owners)17, the manufacturers of the Operating System and device ("OS and 
device manufacturers")18; (iii), app stores (the distributor of the app) and, finally, (iv) other 
parties involved in the processing of personal data. In some cases the data protection 
responsibilities are shared, in particular when the same entity is involved at multiple stages, 
for example where the OS manufacturer also controls the app store.  
 
There is also a role for end users to take appropriate responsibility, to the extent that they 
create and store personal data through their mobile devices. If such processing serves purely 
personal or household purposes, the Data Protection Directive would not apply (Article 3(2)) 
and the user would be exempt from the formal data protection obligations. If users however  
decide to share data via the app, for instance by making information public to an indefinite 
number of people19 using a social network app, they process information beyond the 
conditions of the household exemption.20 
3.3.1 App developers 
App developers create apps and/or make them available to end users. This category includes 
private and public sector organisations that outsource the app development and those 
companies and individuals building and deploying apps. They design and/or create the 
software which will run on the smartphones and thus decide the extent to which the app will 
access and process the different categories of personal data in the device and/or through 
remote computing resources (app developers' or third parties' computing units). 
To the extent the app developer determines the purposes and means of the processing of 
personal data on smart devices, he is the data controller as defined in Article 2(d) of the Data 
Protection Directive. In that case, he has to comply with the provisions of the entire Data 
Protection Directive. The key provisions are explained in paragraphs 3.4 to 3.10 of this 
opinion.  
 
Even when the household exemption applies to a user, the app developer would still be 
responsible as data controller if he processes the data for his own purposes. This is for 
example relevant when the app requires access to the entire address book in order to deliver 
the service (instant messaging, phone calls, video calls). 
                                                        
17  The Working Party uses the common terminology of app developers, but emphasises that the term is not 
limited to the programmers or technical developers of apps, but includes the app owners, that is, companies 
and organisations that commission the development of apps and determine their purposes.  
18  In some instances, the manufacturer of the OS overlaps with the device manufacturer, whereas in other cases 
the device manufacturer is a different company from the OS supplier.  
19  See cases European Court of Justice, Case C-101/01 Criminal proceedings against Bodil Lindqvist, judgment 
of 6 November 2003 and Case C-73/07 Tietosuojavaltuutettu v Satakunnan Markkinapörssi Oy and 
Satamedia Oy, judgment of 16 December 2008.  
20  See 
WP29 
Opinion 
5/2009 
on 
online 
social 
networking 
(June 
2009), 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2009/wp163_en.pdf  
10 
 
 
The responsibilities of the app developer will be considerably limited if no personal data are 
processed and/or made available outside the device, or if the app developer has taken 
appropriate technical and organisational measures to ensure that data are irreversibly 
anonymised and aggregated on the device itself, prior to any data leaving the device. 
 
In any case, if the app developer gains access to information that is stored on the device, the 
ePrivacy directive also applies and the app developer must comply with the consent 
requirement stipulated in Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy directive. 
 
To the extent that the app developer has outsourced some or all of the actual data processing 
to a third party and that third party assumes the role of a data processor then the app developer 
must comply with all obligations related to the use of a data processor. This would also 
include the use of a cloud computing provider (e.g. for external data storage).21  
 
To the extent that the app developer allows for the access of user data by third parties (such as 
an ad network accessing the geo location data of the device in order to deliver behavioural 
advertising) it must employ appropriate mechanisms to comply with the applicable 
requirements under the EU legal framework. If the third party accesses data stored in the 
device, the obligation to obtain informed consent of Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy Directive 
applies. Furthermore, if the third party processes personal data for its own purposes, it may 
also be a joint data controller with the app developer and must therefore ensure respect of the 
purpose limitation principle, and security obligations22 for the part of the processing for which 
it determines purposes and means. As different types of arrangements - both commercial and 
technical - may exist between app developers and third parties, the respective responsibility of 
each party will have to be established on a case-by-case basis having regard to the specific 
circumstances of the processing involved. 
 
An app developer may use third party libraries with software that provides common 
functionalities, such as for example a library for a social gaming platform. The app developer 
must ensure users are aware of any data processing undertaken by such libraries and if that is 
the case, that such data processing is compliant with the EU legal framework, including where 
relevant, by obtaining the consent of the user. In that sense, app developers must prevent use 
of functionalities that are hidden from the user.  
3.3.2 OS and device manufacturers 
The OS and device manufacturers should also be considered as data controllers (and where 
relevant, as joint controllers) for any personal data which is processed for their own purposes 
such as the smooth running of the device, security etc. This would include user generated data 
(e.g. user details at registration), data automatically generated by the device (e.g. if the device 
has a ‘phone home’ functionality for its whereabouts) or personal data processed by the OS or 
device manufacturer resulting from the installation or use of apps. Where the OS or device 
                                                        
21  See WP29 Opinion 05/2012 on Cloud Computing (July 2012), http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-
protection/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2012/wp196_en.pdf.  
22  See 
WP29 
Opinion 
2/2010 
on 
online 
behavioural 
advertising 
(June 
2010), 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2010/wp171_en.pdf and WP29 Opinion 1/2010 on 
the 
concepts 
of 
"controller" 
and 
"processor" 
(February 
2010), 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2010/wp169_en.pdf  
11 
 
manufacturer provides additional functionality such as a back-up or remote locate facility they 
would also be the data controller for personal data processed for this purpose.  
 
 
The OS and device manufacturer are also responsible for the application programming 
interface (API) which enables the processing of personal data by apps on the smart device. 
The app developer will be able to access those features and functions which the OS and 
device manufacturers make available through the API. Since the OS and device manufacturers 
determine the means of (and extent of) access to personal data, they must ensure that the app 
developer has sufficient granularity of control so that access is granted only to those data that 
are necessary for the functioning of the app. The OS and device manufacturers should also 
ensure that this access can be revoked in a simple and effective manner.  
 
The concept of "privacy by design" is an important principle which is indirectly referred to 
already in the Data Protection Directive23 and which, together with "privacy by default"  
emerges more clearly in the ePrivacy Directive.24 It requires from the manufacturers of a 
device or an application to embed data protection from the very beginning of its design. 
Privacy by design is explicitly required for the design of telecom equipment, as provided 
under the radio and telecom terminal equipment directive.25 Therefore, OS and device 
manufacturers, together with the app stores have an important responsibility to provide 
safeguards for the protection of personal data and privacy of app users. This includes ensuring 
the availability of appropriate mechanisms to inform and educate the end user about what the 
apps can do and what data they are able to access, as well as providing appropriate settings for 
app users to change the parameters of the processing.26 
3.3.3 App stores 
Each of the most widely used types of smart device has its own app store and it often is the 
case that a particular OS is deeply integrated with a particular app store. App stores often 
process upfront payments for apps and can also support in-app purchases and therefore 
require user registration with name, address and financial data. These (directly) identifiable 
data may be combined with data about the purchase and usage behaviour and with data read 
from, or generated by, the device (such as unique identifiers). For the processing of such 
personal data app stores are likely to be the data controller, including if they report such 
                                                        
23  See recital 46 and Article 17. 
24  See Article 14(3) 
25  Directive 1999/5/EC of 9 March 1999 on radio equipment and telecommunications terminal equipment and 
the mutual recognition of their conformity. L 91/10 Official Journal of the European Communities, 7.4.1999. 
Article 3.3 (c) stipulates that the European Commission may decide that end user devices shall be so 
constructed that they incorporate safeguards to ensure that the personal data and privacy of the user and of 
the subscriber are protected. 
26  The Working Party welcomes the recommendations of the FTC in this respect, in the staff report Mobile 
Privacy Disclosures referred to in note 6 supra, for example on page 15: "(…) platforms are in a unique 
position to provide consistent disclosures across apps and are encouraged to do so. Consistent with 
workshop comments, they could also consider making these disclosures at multiple points in time (…)." 
Apps that require access to geolocation must use the location services of the OS. When an 
app uses geolocation, the OS may collect personal data to provide the geolocation 
information to the apps, and may also consider using the data to improve its own location 
services. For this latter purpose, the OS is the data controller.  
12 
 
information back to the app developers. Where the app store processes an end user’s app 
download or usage history or similar facility to restore previously downloaded apps, they 
would also be the data controller for personal data processed for this purpose. 
 
 
App stores are in an important position to enable app developers to deliver adequate 
information about the app, including the types of data the app is able to process and for what 
purposes. App stores can enforce these rules by their admission policy (based on either ex 
ante or ex post controls). In collaboration with the OS manufacturer, the app store can develop 
a framework to enable app developers to deliver consistent and meaningful information 
notices (such as symbols representing certain kinds of access to sensory data) and display 
these prominently in the app store catalogue.  
3.3.4 Third parties 
There are many different third parties involved in the data processing of data through the use 
of apps. 
 
For example, many free apps are paid for by advertising which can be, but not limited to, 
contextual or personalised advertising, enabled by tracking facilities such as cookies or other 
device identifiers. Advertising may consist of a banner space within the app, out-of-app ads 
that are delivered by modifying browser settings or placing icons on the mobile desktop or 
delivered through a personalised organisation of the app content (e.g. sponsored search 
results). 
 
Advertising for apps is generally provided by advertising networks and similar intermediaries 
which may be linked with or be the same entity as the OS manufacturer or app store. As 
outlined in WP29 Opinion 2/2010,27 online advertising often entails the processing of personal 
data as defined by Article 2 of the Data Protection Directive and interpreted by Article 29 
Working Party.28  
 
Other examples of third parties are analytics providers and communications service providers. 
Analytics providers enable app developers to gain insight in the use, popularity and usability 
of their apps. Communications service providers29 may also have an important role in 
determining the default settings and security updates of many devices and may process data 
about the use of apps. Their customisation ("branding") might have consequences for the 
                                                        
27  WP29 
Opinion 
2/2010 
on 
online 
behavioural 
advertising 
(June 
2010), 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2010/wp171_en.pdf  
28  See also the interpretation of the concept of personal data in WP29 Opinion 4/2007 on the concept of 
personal data (June 2007), http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2007/wp136_en.pdf  
29 Communications service providers are also subjected to sector-specific data protection obligations which are 
outside of the scope of this opinion. 
An app store records login credentials as well as the history of previously bought apps. It also 
asks the user to provide a credit card number that will be stored with the account of the user. 
The app store is the data controller for these operations.  
 
On the contrary, websites that allow the download of an app to be installed on the device 
without any authentication may find that they are not processing any personal data. 
13 
 
possible technical and functional measures that the user can apply to protect his or her 
personal data.  
 
Compared to app developers, third parties may have two types of roles: one is to execute 
operations for the app owner, for example to provide analytics within the app. In that case, 
when they act exclusively on behalf of the app developer and do not process data for their 
own purposes and/or share data across developers, they are likely to be operating as data 
processors. 
 
The second role is to collect information across apps to supply additional services: provide 
analytics figures at a larger scale (app popularity, personalized recommendation) or avoid the 
display of the same ad to the same user. When third parties process personal data for their 
own purposes, they act as data controllers and therefore must comply with all applicable 
provisions from the Data Protection Directive.30 In the case of behavioural advertising, the 
data controller must obtain valid user consent for the collection and processing of personal 
data, consisting for example of the analysis and combination of personal data, and the creation 
and/or application of profiles. As explained previously by the WP29 in the Opinion 2/2012 on 
online behavioural advertising such consent is best achieved through the use of a prior opt in 
consent mechanism. 
To the extent that third parties access or store information on the smart device they must 
comply with the consent requirement of Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy Directive.  
 
In this context, it is important to note that on smart devices, users generally have limited 
possibilities to install software that would control the processing of personal data as it is 
common in the desktop web environment. As an alternative to using HTTP cookies, third 
parties often access unique identifiers to single out (groups of) users and serve them targeted 
services, including advertisements. Since many of these identifiers cannot be deleted or 
changed by users (such as IMEI, IMSI, MSISDN31and specific unique device identifiers 
added by the operating system) these third-parties have the potential to process significant 
amounts of personal data without the end user being in control. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
30  WP29 Opinion 2/2010 on online behavioural advertising, p. 10-11. 
31  Mobile Station Integrated Services Digital Network 
A company provides metrics for app owners and advertisers through the use of trackers 
embedded, by the app developer, within apps. The trackers of the company are therefore able 
to be installed on many apps and devices. One of its services is to inform app developers 
what other apps are used by a user, through the collection of a unique identifier. The 
company defines the means (i.e. trackers) and purposes of its tools before offering them to 
app developers, advertisers and others and therefore acts as a data controller.  
14 
 
3.4 Legal ground 
 
In order to process personal data, a legal basis is required as enumerated in Article 7 of the 
Data Protection Directive. Article 7 distinguishes six legal grounds for data processing: the 
data subject's unambiguously given consent; the necessity for the performance of a contract 
with the data subject; to protect the vital interests of the data subject, the necessity for 
compliance with a legal obligation; (for public authorities) to perform a task carried out in the 
public interest and the necessity for legitimate (business) interests. 
 
With regard to the storing of information, or the gaining of access to information already 
stored in the smart device, Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy Directive (i.e. the consent requirement 
for placing and retrieving information from a device) creates a more detailed 
limitation/restriction of the legal grounds that may be taken into account. 
3.4.1 Consent prior to installation and processing of personal data 
In case of apps, the principal applicable legal ground is consent. When installing an app, 
information is placed on the end-user device. Many apps also access data stored on the device, 
contacts in the address book, pictures, videos and other personal documents. In all those 
cases, Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy Directive requires consent from the user, having been 
provided with clear and comprehensive information, before the placing and retrieving of 
information from the device. 
 
It is important to note the distinction between the consent required to place any information 
on and read information from the device, and the consent necessary to have a legal ground for 
the processing of different types of personal data. Though both consent requirements are 
simultaneously applicable, each based on a different legal basis, they are both subject to the 
conditions of having to be free, specific and informed (as defined in Article 2(h) of the Data 
Protection Directive). Therefore, the two types of consent can be merged in practice, either 
during installation or before the app starts to collect personal data from the device,  provided 
that the user is made unambiguously aware of what he is consenting to.  
 
Many app stores provide an opportunity for app developers to inform end users about the 
basic features of an app prior to installation and require a positive action from the user before 
the app is downloaded and installed (ie click an “install” button). Whilst such an action may, 
in some circumstances, fulfil the consent requirement of Article 5(3), it is unlikely to provide 
sufficient information in order to act as valid consent for the processing of personal data. This 
topic has been previously discussed by the WP29 in its Opinion 15/2011 on the definition of 
consent.32 
 
In the context of smart devices, ‘freely given’ means that a user must have the choice to 
accept or refuse the processing of his personal data. Therefore if an app needs to process 
personal data, a user must be free to accept or refuse. The user should not be confronted with 
a screen containing a single 'Yes I accept' option in order to finish the installation. An option 
to ‘Cancel’ or otherwise halt the installation must be available.  
 
                                                        
32  WP29 Opinion 15/2011 on the definition of consent (July 2011), http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-
protection/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2011/wp187_en.pdf  
15 
 
‘Informed’ means that the data subject must have the necessary information at his disposal in 
order to form an accurate judgement.33 In order to avoid any ambiguity, such information must 
be made available before any personal data is processed. This includes data processing that 
could take place during installation, for example, for debugging or tracking purposes. The 
content and form of such information is elaborated in paragraph 3.7 of this Opinion.  
 
‘Specific’ means that the expression of will must relate to the processing of a particular data 
item or a limited category of data processing. It is for this reason that simply clicking an 
“install” button cannot be regarded as valid consent for the processing of personal data due to 
the fact that consent cannot be a generally formulated authorisation. In some cases users are 
able to give a granular consent, where consent is sought for each type of data the app intends 
to access.34 Such an approach achieves two important legal requirements, firstly of adequately 
informing the user about important elements of the service and secondly asking for specific 
consent for each.35 The alternative approach of an app developer asking its users to accept a 
lengthy set of terms and conditions and/or privacy policy does not constitute specific 
consent.36 
 
Specific also relates to the practice of tracking user behaviour by advertisers and any other 
third party. The default settings provided by OSs and apps must be such as to avoid any 
tracking, to allow users to give specific consent to this type of data processing. These default 
settings may not be circumvented by third parties, as is currently often the case with "Do Not 
Track" mechanisms implemented in browsers. 
 
Examples of specific consent 
An app provides information about nearby restaurants. To be installed the app developer must 
seek consent. To access the geolocation data, the app developer must separately ask for 
consent, e.g. during installation or prior to accessing the geolocation.  
Specific means that the consent must be limited to the specific purpose of advising the user 
about nearby restaurants. The location data from the device may therefore only be accessed 
when the user is using the app for that purpose. The user’s consent to process geolocation data 
does not allow the app to continuously collect location data from the device. This further 
processing would require additional information and separate consent.  
 
Similarly, for a communication app to access the contact list, the user must be able to select 
contacts that the user wishes to communicate with, instead of having to grant access to the 
entire address book (including contact details of non-users of that service that cannot have 
consented to the processing of data relating to them). 
 
                                                        
33  Idem, p. 19. 
34  Granular consent means that individuals can finely (specifically) control which personal data processing 
functions offered by the app they want to activate. 
35  The need for such granular consent is also expressly endorsed by the FTC staff in its most recent report (note 
6 supra), p. 15-16: "(…) platforms should consider providing just-in-time disclosures and obtaining 
affirmative express consent for collection of other content that many consumers would find sensitive in many 
contexts, such as photos, contacts, calendar entries, or the recording of audio or video content."  
36  Idem, p 34-35: ‘General consent without a precise indication of the aim of the processing to which the data 
subject agrees does not comply with this requirement. That means that the information about the goal of the 
processing must not be included in the general provisions but in a separate consent clause. 
16 
 
It is important to note however that even if the consent meets the three elements described 
above, it is not a license for unfair and unlawful processing. If the purpose of the data 
processing is excessive and/or disproportionate, even if the user has consented, the app 
developer will not have a valid legal ground and would likely be in violation of the Data 
Protection Directive.  
 
Example of excessive and unlawful data processing 
An alarm clock app offers an optional feature whereby the user can give a verbal command to 
silence or ‘snooze’ the alarm. In this example, the consent for recording would be limited to 
whilst the alarm is sounding. Any monitoring or recording or audio whilst the alarm is not 
sounding would likely be considered as excessive and unlawful.  
 
In the case of apps installed on the device by default (prior to the end user taking ownership) 
or other processing undertaken by the OS which rely on consent as a legal basis, the data 
controllers must carefully consider whether or not this consent is truly valid. In many cases, a 
separate consent mechanism should be considered, perhaps when the app is first run, in order 
to give the data controller sufficient opportunity to fully inform the end user. When the data 
are special categories of data, as defined in Article 8 of the Data Protection Directive, the 
consent must be explicit.  
 
Last but not least, users must be given the opportunity to withdraw their consent in a simple 
and effective manner. This will be elaborated in section 3.8 of this Opinion. 
3.4.2 Legal grounds for data processing during usage of the app 
As explained above, consent is the necessary legal ground to permit the app developer to 
lawfully read and/or write information and consequently process personal data. In a 
subsequent phase, during the usage of the app, the app developer may invoke other legal 
grounds for other types of data processing, so long as this does not involve processing of 
sensitive personal data. 
 
Such legal grounds may be the necessity for the performance of a contract with the data 
subject or the necessity for legitimate (business) interests, Article 7(b) and (f) of the Data 
Protection Directive. 
 
These legal grounds are limited to the processing of non-sensitive personal data of a specific 
user, and can only be invoked to the extent a certain data processing is strictly necessary to 
perform the desired service or, in the case of Article 7(f), only if such interests are not 
overridden by the interests for fundamental rights and freedoms of the data subject. 
 
Examples of contractual legal ground 
A user consents to the installation of a mobile banking app. In order to fulfil a request to make 
a payment the bank does not have to ask for the separate consent of the user to disclose his 
name and bank account number to the recipient of the payment. This disclosure is strictly 
necessary in order to perform the contract with this specific user, and therefore the bank has a 
legal ground in Article 7 (b) of the Data Protection Directive. The same reasoning applies to 
communication apps; when they provide essential information such as an account name, e-
mail address or phone number to another individual that the user wishes to communicate with, 
the disclosure is obviously necessary to perform the contract.  
17 
 
3.5 Purpose limitation and data minimisation 
 
Fundamental principles underlying the Data Protection Directive are purpose limitation and 
data minimisation. Purpose limitation enables users to make a deliberate choice to trust a 
party with their personal data as they will learn how their data are being used, and will be able 
to rely on the limitative purpose description to understand for what purposes their data will be 
used. The purposes of the data processing therefore need to be well-defined and 
comprehensible for an average user without expert legal or technical knowledge.  
 
At the same time, purpose limitation requires that app developers have a good overview of 
their business case before they start to collect personal data from users. Personal data may 
only be processed for fair and lawful purposes (Article 6(1)a of the Data Protection Directive) 
and these purposes must be defined before the data processing takes place.  
 
The purpose limitation principle excludes sudden changes in the key conditions of the 
processing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Purpose limitation goes hand-in-hand with the principle of data minimisation. In order to 
prevent unnecessary and potentially unlawful data processing, app developers must carefully 
consider which data are strictly necessary to perform the desired functionality.  
 
Apps can obtain access to many of the functionalities in the device, and are therefore capable 
to do many things like sending a stealth SMS, accessing images and the entire address book. 
Many app stores support (semi) automated updates where the app developer can integrate new 
features and make those available with little or no interaction by the end user.  
 
The Working Party emphasises at this point that third parties obtaining access to the user data 
through the apps must respect the principles of purpose limitation and data minimization. 
Unique, often unchangeable, device identifiers should not be used for the purpose of interest 
based advertising and/or analytics, due to the inability of users to revoke their consent. App 
developers should ensure that function creep is prevented by not changing the processing 
from one version of an app to another without giving the end users appropriate information 
notices and opportunities to withdraw from either the processing or the entire service. Users 
should also be offered the technical means to verify statements about declared purposes, by 
allowing them access to information about the amounts of outgoing traffic per app, in relation 
to user-initiated traffic. 
 
Information and user controls are the key features to ensure the respect of the principles of 
data minimisation and purpose limitation.  
 
Access to the underlying data on the device through the APIs gives OS and device 
manufacturers and app stores an opportunity to enforce specific rules and offer appropriate 
information to end users. For example, the OS and device manufacturers should offer an API 
For example, if an app originally had as purpose to allow users to e-mail each other, but the 
developer decides to changes its business model and merges the e-mail addresses of its users 
with the telephone numbers of users of another app. The respective data controllers would 
then have to individually approach all users and ask for their prior unambiguous consent for 
this new purpose of their personal data processing.  
 
18 
 
with precise controls to differentiate each type of these data and ensure that app developers 
can request access to only those data that are strictly necessary for the (lawful) functionality 
of their app. The types of data requested by the app developer can then be clearly displayed in 
the app store to inform the user prior to installation.  
 
In this regard, control over the access to data stored in the device relies on different 
mechanisms:  
a. OS and device manufacturers and app stores define rules that apply to submit apps 
in their app store: app developers must respect these rules or risk not being 
available in these stores.37 
b. Operating Systems’ APIs define standard methods to access the data stored in the 
telephone to which apps have access. They also have an impact on the collection 
of data on the server side.  
c. Ex-ante controls - controls in place before installing an app.38 
d. Ex-post controls - controls implemented after having installed an app. 
 
3.6 Security  
 
Following article 17 of the Data Protection Directive data controllers and processors must 
take the necessary organisational and technical measures to ensure the protection of the 
personal data they process. As a result, measures have to be taken by all actors identified in 
section 3.3, each according to their role and responsibility.  
 
The goal of compliance with the security obligation is twofold. It will empower users to more 
stringently control their data, and enhance the level of trust in the entities that actually handle 
users’ data.  
 
In order to comply with their respective security obligations as data controllers, app 
developers, app stores, OS and device manufacturers and third parties have to take the 
principles of privacy by design  and by default into account.. This requires an ongoing 
assessment of both existing and future data protection risks, and implementation and 
evaluation of effective mitigating measures, including data minimisation.  
App developers 
 
There are many publicly available guidelines regarding the security of mobile apps published 
by OS and device manufacturers and independent third parties, for example from ENISA.39 
 
It is outside of the scope of this opinion to review all best security practices in the 
development of apps; however the Working Party takes this opportunity to review those that 
have a potentially grave impact on app users' fundamental rights. 
 
                                                        
37  Jailbroken devices allow installation of apps outside official stores; Android devices also allow installation of 
apps from other sources. 
38  With the particular case of pre-installed apps.  
39  ENISA "Smartphone Secure Development Guideline": http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-
CIIP/critical-applications/smartphone-security-1/smartphone-secure-development-guidelines. 
19 
 
An important decision before designing an app is the decision where the data will be stored. 
In some cases user data are stored on the device, but app developers may also use a client-
server architecture. This means personal data are transferred or copied to the service 
provider’s systems. Storing and processing data on the device gives the end users the greatest 
control over those data, for example allowing them to delete the data if they withdraw consent 
to its processing. However, securely storing data in a remote location can assist in data 
recovery following the loss or theft of a device. Intermediate methods are also possible.  
 
App developers must identify clear-cut policies on how the software is developed and 
distributed. There is also a role for the OS and device manufacturers to promote secure 
processing by apps, which will be elaborated below. Secondly, app developers and app stores 
must design and implement a security-friendly environment, with tools to prevent malicious 
apps from spreading and allow each app to be installed/uninstalled easily.  
 
Good practices which can be put in place during the design of an app include that of 
minimizing the lines and complexity of code, and implementing checks to exclude that data 
might be unintentionally transferred or compromised. In addition, all inputs should be 
validated to prevent buffer overflow or injection attacks. Other security mechanisms which 
are worth mentioning include adequate security patch management strategies, and performing 
regular, independent system security audits. Additionally, app design criteria should include 
the implementation of the principle of the least privilege by default, whereby apps are enabled 
to access only the data they really need to make a functionality available to the user. App 
developers and app stores should also encourage users, with warnings, to complement these 
good design practices by virtuous user practices, such as updating their apps to the latest 
available versions, and reminders to avoid the reuse of passwords across different services. 
 
During the design stage of the app, app developers must also take measures to prevent 
unauthorised access to personal data by ensuring that data are protected both in transit and 
when stored, when applicable.  
 
Mobile apps should run in specific locations within the memory of the devices (sandboxes40), 
in order to reduce the consequences of malware/malicious apps. In close collaboration with 
the OS manufacturer and/or app store, app developers must use available mechanisms that 
allow users to see what data are being processed by which apps, and to selectively enable and 
disable permissions. The use of hidden functionalities should not be allowed. 
 
App developers must carefully consider their methods of user identification and 
authentication. They should not use persistent (device-specific) identifiers, but, instead, use 
low entropy app-specific or temporary device identifiers to avoid tracking users over time. 
Privacy-friendly authentication mechanisms should be considered. When authenticating users, 
app developers must give special care to the management of user-ids and passwords. The 
latter must be stored encrypted and securely, as a keyed cryptographic hash value. Making a 
test available to users on the robustness of chosen passwords is also a useful technique to 
encourage better passwords (entropy check). When appropriate (access to sensitive data, but 
also access to paid-for resources) re-authentication could be envisaged, also by means of 
multiple factors and different channels (e.g. access code sent by SMS) and/or the use of 
authentication data linked to the end user (rather than to the device). Also, when selecting 
                                                        
40  A sandbox is a security mechanism to separate running programs. 
20 
 
session identifiers, unpredictable strings should be used, possibly in combination with 
contextual information such as date and time, but also IP address or geo-location data. 
 
App developers should also be mindful of the requirements set forth in the ePrivacy directive 
with regard to personal data breaches and the need to proactively inform users. Whilst these 
requirements currently only apply to providers of publicly available electronic 
communications services it is expected that the obligation will be extended to all data 
controllers (and data processors) by way of the future Data Protection Regulation as per the 
Commission’s proposals (COM 2012/0011/COD). This further reinforces the need to have 
and continuously evaluate a thorough “security plan” covering the collection, storage and 
processing of any personal data, to prevent such breaches from occurring and avoid incurring 
the heavy pecuniary penalties envisaged in such cases. The security plan, among others, must 
also provide for vulnerability management and for timely and secure release of reliable bug 
fixes. 
 
The responsibility of app developers for the security of their products does not end with the 
delivery of a working version to the market. Apps may, as any software product, suffer from 
security flaws and vulnerabilities and app developers must develop fixes or patches for these 
and provide them to those players that can make them available to the users or do this 
themselves. 
 
App stores 
App stores are an important intermediary between end users and app developers and should 
include a number of robust and effective checks on apps before admitting them to the 
marketplace. They should provide information on the checks they are actually performing, 
and include information on what type of data protection compliance checks they carry out.  
 
While this measure is not 100% effective in eliminating the dissemination of malicious apps, 
statistics show that this practice greatly reduces the occurrence of malicious functionalities in 
“official” app stores.41 In order to cope with the large number of apps that are submitted on a 
daily basis this process might benefit from the availability of automatic analysis tools as well 
as from implementing information exchange channels between security experts and software 
professionals and effective procedures and policies to deal with reported issues. 
 
In addition to the review of apps before admittance to the app store, apps should also be 
subjected to a public reputation mechanism. Apps should not just be rated by users for how 
“cool” they are, but also on the basis of their functionalities, with specific reference to privacy 
and security mechanisms. Also, reputation mechanisms should be engineered to prevent false 
ratings. Qualification and reputation mechanisms for apps can also prove effective in building 
mutual trust between the various entities, especially if data are exchanged through a long 
chain of third parties.  
 
App stores often have implemented a method to remotely uninstall malicious or insecure 
apps. This mechanism, if not properly designed, might constitute a hindrance to empowering 
users to keep tighter control of their data. A privacy friendly means for an app store to 
remotely uninstall apps should therefore be based on information and user consent. Moreover, 
                                                        
41  “Hey, You, Get Off of My Market: Detecting Malicious Apps in Official and Alternative Android Markets”, Y 
Zhou et al., Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) 2012 
21 
 
from a more practical standpoint, feedback channels should be given to users to report 
security problems with their apps and on the effectiveness of any remote removal procedure. 
 
Like app developers, app stores should be aware of future personal data breach notification 
obligations, and work closely together with app developers in order to prevent those breaches. 
 
OS and device manufacturers 
OS and device manufacturers are also an important player in the definition of minimum 
standards and best practice amongst app developers, not only in the security of the underlying 
software and APIs but also in the tools, guidance and reference material they make available. 
OS and device manufacturers should make available strong and well known encryption 
algorithms and support appropriate key lengths. They should also make strong and secure 
authentication mechanisms available for app developers (e.g. the use of certificates signed by 
trusted certification authorities to verify the authorisation of a remote resource). This would 
also avoid the need for app developers to develop proprietary authentication mechanisms. In 
practice this is often poorly implemented and may represent a serious vulnerability.42  
 
The access to and processing of personal data by apps should be managed through API built-
in classes and methods providing proper checks and safeguards. The OS and device 
manufacturers should ensure that methods and functions allowing access to personal data 
include features aiming to implement granular consent requests. Similarly, action should be 
taken in order to exclude or limit access to personal data by using low-level functions or other 
means that could circumvent controls and safeguards incorporated into APIs. 
 
OS and device manufacturers must also develop clear audit trails into the devices such that 
end users can clearly see which apps have been accessing data on their devices.  
 
All parties must respond quickly to security vulnerabilities in a timely fashion such that end 
users are not unnecessarily exposed to security flaws. Unfortunately, some OS and device 
manufacturers (and telecom operators when they distribute branded devices) fail to provide 
long-term support to versions of the OS leaving users unprotected against well-known 
security vulnerabilities. OS and device manufacturers, together with app developers, must 
provide end users with upfront information about the length of time they might expect regular 
security updates. They should also inform users as soon as possible if a security issue requires 
an update to fix.  
 
Third parties 
The above security features and considerations must also be applied by third parties when 
they collect and process personal data for their own purposes, foremost advertisers and 
analytics providers. This includes secure transmission and encrypted storage of unique device 
and app user identifiers and other personal data.  
 
                                                        
42  It has recently been pointed out that the lack of visual security indicators for SSL/TLS usage and the 
inadequate use of SSL/TLS can be exploited to launch Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attacks. The cumulative 
installed base of the apps with confirmed vulnerabilities against MITM attacks includes several million users 
according to recent research. “Why Eve and Mallory Love Android: An Analysis of Android SSL 
(In)Security”, Bernd Freisleben and Matthew Smith, 19th ACM Conference on Computer and 
Communications Security (ACM CCS 2012). 
22 
 
3.7 Information 
3.7.1 The obligation to inform and the content required 
According to Article 10 of the Data Protection Directive, each data subject has a right to know 
the identity of the data controller who is processing their personal data. Additionally, in the 
context of apps, the end user has the right to know what type of personal data is being 
processed and for what purpose the data are intended to be used. If the personal data of the 
user are collected from other actors in the app ecosystem (as described in section 3.3 of this 
Opinion), the end user, according to Article 11 of the Data Protection Directive, nonetheless 
has the right to be informed about such data processing, in the same manner as described. 
Therefore, if processing personal data the relevant data controller must inform potential users 
at the minimum about:  
 
 who they are (identity and contact detail),  
 the precise categories of personal data the app developer will collect and process,  
 why (for what precise purposes),  
 whether data will be disclosed to third parties  
 how users may exercise their rights, in terms of withdrawal of consent and deletion of 
data).  
 
Availability of this information on personal data processing is critical in order to obtain 
consent from the user for the data processing. Consent can only be valid if the person has first 
been informed about the key elements of the data processing. Providing such information only 
after the app has started to process personal data (which often starts during installation) is not 
deemed sufficient and is legally invalid. In agreement with the FTC staff report, the Working 
Party underlines the need to provide information at the point in time when it matters to 
consumers, just prior to the collection of such information by apps. Being told what data are 
being processed is particularly important given the broad access apps generally have to 
sensors and data structures on the device, where such access in many cases is not intuitively 
obvious. Adequate information is also of vital importance when the app processes special 
categories of personal data, e. g. on health condition, political beliefs, sexual orientation, etc. 
Finally, the app developer should clearly differentiate mandatory and optional information and 
the system should allow the user to refuse access to optional information using privacy 
friendly default options. 
 
With regard to the identity of the data controller, users need to know who is legally 
responsible for the processing of their personal data and how that controller can be contacted. 
Otherwise they cannot exercise their rights, such as the right to access data (remotely) stored 
about them. Due to the fragmented nature of the app landscape, it is crucial that every app has 
a single point of contact, taking responsibility for all the data processing that takes place via 
the app. It must not be left to the end user to research the relations between app developers 
and other parties processing personal data through the app. 
 
With regard to the purpose(s), end users must be adequately informed which data are 
collected about them and why. Users should also be made aware in clear and plain language 
whether the data may be reused by other parties, and if so, for what purposes. Elastic purposes 
such as 'product innovation' are inadequate to inform users. It should be plainly stated if users 
will be asked to consent to data sharing with third parties for advertising and/or analytics 
purposes. There is an important responsibility for the app stores to ensure that this information 
is available and easily accessible for each app. 
23 
 
 
There is an important responsibility for app stores to ensure appropriate information. The use 
of visual signifiers or icons regarding data uses is strongly recommended to make users aware 
of the types of data processing. 
 
In addition to the above minimum scope of information, necessary in order to seek consent 
from the app user, the Working Party in view of fair processing of personal data strongly 
advises that the data controllers also provide to the users information on: 
 proportionality considerations for the types of data collected or accessed on the device, 
 retention periods of the data, 
 security measures applied by the data controller. 
 
The Working Party also recommends that app developers include information in their privacy 
policy dedicated to European users, how the app complies with European data protection law, 
including possible transfers of personal data from Europe to for example the USA, and 
whether and how the app, in that case, complies with the Safe Harbor framework. 
3.7.2 The form of the information 
The essential scope of information about data processing must be available to the users before 
app installation, via the app store. Secondly, the relevant information about the data 
processing must also be accessible from within the app, after installation. 
 
As a joint controller with the app developers with regard to information, app stores must 
ensure that every app provides the essential information on personal data processing. They 
should check the hyperlinks to included pages with privacy information and remove apps with 
broken links or otherwise inaccessible information about the data processing. 
  
The Working Party recommends that information about personal data processing is also 
available, and easy to locate, such as within the app store and preferably on the regular 
websites of the app developer responsible for the app. It is unacceptable that the users be 
placed in a position where they would have to search the web for information on the app data 
processing policies instead of being informed directly by the app developer or other data 
controller. 
 
At the very least, every app should have a readable, understandable and easily accessible 
privacy policy, where all the above mentioned information is included. Many apps do not 
meet this minimum transparency requirement. According to the June 2012 FPF study, 56% of 
the paid apps do not have a privacy policy, and almost 30% of the free apps.  
 
Apps which do not, or are not intended for the processing or personal data, should clearly 
state this within the privacy policy.  
 
Of course, there are limitations to the amount of information that can be presented on a small 
screen, but this is no excuse to not adequately inform end users. Several strategies can be 
followed to ensure users' awareness of key elements of the service. The Working Party sees 
benefits in the use of layered notices as detailed by WP29 in Opinion 10/200443, where the 
                                                        
43  
WP29 
Opinion 
10/2004 
on 
More 
Harmonised 
Information 
Provisions 
(July 
2004), 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2004/wp100_en.pdf  
24 
 
initial notice to the user contains the minimum information required by the EU legal 
framework, and further information is available through links to the whole privacy policy. The 
information should be presented directly on screen, easily accessible and highly visible. Next 
to comprehensive information suitable for the small screen of mobile devices, users must be 
able to link through to more extensive explanations, for example in the privacy policy, how 
the app uses personal data, who the data controller is and where a user can exercise his rights. 
 
This approach may be combined with the use of icons, images, video and audio, and make use 
of contextual real time notification when an app accesses the address book or photos.44 These 
icons have to be meaningful, i.e. clear, self-explaining and unambiguous. Clearly, the OS 
manufacturer has an important joint responsibility to facilitate the use of such icons. 
 
In fact, app developers excel in programming and designing complex interfaces for small 
screens, and the Working Party calls on the industry to use this creative talent to deliver more 
innovative solutions to effectively inform users on mobile devices. In order to ensure that the 
information really is understandable to users without a technical or legal background, the 
Working Party (in line with the FTC staff report) strongly recommends consumer testing of 
chosen information strategies.45 
 
3.8 Data subject's rights 
 
Following Articles 12 and 14 of the Data Protection Directive, app developers and other data 
controllers in the mobile app ecosystem must enable app users to exercise their rights of 
access, rectification, erasure and their right to object to data processing. If a user exercises the 
right to access, the data controller has to provide the user with information about the data are 
being processed and on the source of those data. If the controller takes automated decisions 
based on the compiled data, the controller must also inform the user about the logic behind 
those decisions. This might be the case when users' performance or conduct is evaluated, for 
example based on financial data or health data, or other profile data. Subject to user request 
the app data controller also must enable rectification, erasure or blocking of personal data if 
they are incomplete, inaccurate or processed unlawfully.  
 
In order for users to be able to exercise control over the processing of their personal data, apps 
must clearly and visibly inform their users about the existence of these access and correction 
mechanisms. The Article 29 Working Party recommends the design and implementation of 
simple but secure online access tools. Access tools should preferably be available within each 
app, or by offering a link to an online feature, where users can get instant access to all the data 
being processed about them and the necessary explanations thereof. Similar initiatives have 
been employed by online service providers, such as different dashboards and other access 
mechanisms. 
 
The need for easy online access is especially high in case of apps that process rich user 
profiles, such as networking, social and messaging apps, or apps that process sensitive or 
financial data. Of course, access should only be granted if the identity of the data subject has 
been established, in order to prevent data leakage to third parties. However, this obligation to 
                                                        
44  For example, the warning icon for geolocation processing used on iPhones. 
45  FTC staff report, note 6 supra, p. 16. 
25 
 
verify the correct identity should not lead to an additional, excessive collection of personal 
data about the data subject. In many cases, authentication could suffice, instead of (full) 
identification. 
 
Additionally, users should always be provided with the possibility to withdraw their consent 
in a manner which is simple and not burdensome. A data subject may withdraw consent for 
data processing in a number of different ways and for a number of different reasons. 
Preferably the option of consent withdrawal should be available through the above mentioned 
easily accessible mechanisms. It must be possible to un-install apps and thereby remove all 
personal data, also from the servers of the data controller(s). In order to allow users to have 
their data deleted by the app developer, there is an important role for the OS manufacturer to 
provide a signal to the app developer once a user uninstalls the app. Such a signal could be 
provided through the API. In principle, after the user has uninstalled the app, the app 
developer does not have a legal ground to continue processing of the personal data relating to 
that user, and therefore has to delete all data. An app developer that wishes to keep certain 
data, for example in order to facilitate reinstallation of the app, has to separately ask for 
consent in the uninstall process, asking the user to agree to a defined extra retention period. 
The only exception to this rule is the possible existence of legal obligations to retain some 
data for specific purposes, for example fiscal obligations relating to financial transactions.46 
 
3.9 Retention periods 
 
App developers must consider the retention of data collected with the app and the data 
protection risks these pose. The specific timescales will depend on the purpose of the app and 
the relevance of the data to the end user. For example, a calendar, diary or photo sharing 
application would place the retention schedule into the control of the end user where for a 
navigation app it may suffice to store only the last 10 recently visited locations. App 
developers should also give consideration to the data of those users who have not used the app 
for an extended period of time. These users may have lost their mobile device, or switched to 
another device without actively uninstalling all apps on the initial device. App developers 
should therefore predefine a time period of inactivity, after which the account will be treated 
as expired and ensure that the user is informed of such a timescale. Upon expiry of this time 
period, the data controller should alert the user and give the user a chance to retrieve personal 
data. If the user doesn’t respond to the alert, personal data relating to the user and usage of the 
app should be irreversibly anonymised or deleted. The reminder period depends on the 
purpose of the app and the location where the data are stored. If it concerns data stored on the 
device itself, for instance a high score in a game, the data may be kept as long as the app is 
installed. If it concerns data that are only used once per year, such as information on a ski 
resort, the reminder period could be 15 months. 
 
                                                        
46  The Working Party reminds all information society services, such as apps, that the European data retention 
obligation (Directive 2006/24/EC) does not apply to them and therefore cannot be invoked as a legal ground 
to continue to process data about app users after they have deleted the app. The Working Party takes this 
opportunity to highlight the especially risky nature of traffic data, which deserve special precautions and 
safeguards per se – as highlighted in the WP29’s Report on the enforcement of the Data Retention Directive 
(WP172) – where all the relevant stakeholders were called upon to implement the appropriate security 
measures. 
26 
 
3.10 Children 
 
Children are avid users of apps, either on their own devices or on shared devices (e.g. those of 
their parents, siblings or in an education setting) and there is clearly a large and diverse 
market for apps targeted at children. But at the same time children have little or no 
understanding of and knowledge about the extent and sensitivity of the data to which apps 
may gain access, or the extent of data sharing with third parties for advertising purposes.  
 
The Working Party has dealt with the issue of child data processing extensively in Opinion 
2/2009 on the protection of children's personal data and only addresses a number of app-
specific risks and recommendations in this paragraph.47 
 
App developers and other data controllers should pay attention to the age limit defining 
children or minors in national legislation, where parental consent to data processing is a 
precondition to lawful data processing by apps.48  
 
When consent can legally be obtained from a minor, and the app is intended to be used by a 
child or a minor, the data controller should pay attention to the minor’s potentially limited 
understanding of and attention for information about data processing. Because of their general 
vulnerability, and taking into account that personal data must be processed fairly and lawfully, 
data controllers aiming at children should even more strictly respect the principles of data 
minimization and purpose limitation. Specifically, data controllers should not process 
children's data for behavioural advertising purposes, neither directly nor indirectly, as this will 
be outside the scope of a child's understanding and therefore exceed the boundaries of lawful 
processing. 
 
The Working Party shares the concerns expressed by the Federal Trade Commission in its 
staff report on mobile apps for kids.49  
 
App developers, in collaboration with app stores and OS and device manufacturers, should 
present the relevant information in a simple manner, in age specific language. The data 
controllers should also specifically refrain from any collection of data relating to the parents 
or family members of the child user, such as financial information or information about 
special categories of information, such as medical data. 
 
 
                                                        
47  WP 160, Opinion 2/2009 on the protection of children's personal data (General Guidelines and the special 
case 
of 
schools) 
(11 
february 
2009), 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/policies/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2009/wp160_en.pdf  
48  In the EU Member States the age limits spans from 12 to 18 years old. 
49 FTC staff report Mobile Apps for Kids: Current Privacy Disclosures are Disappointing (Feb. 2012), 
http://www.ftc.gov/os/2012/02/120216mobile_apps_kids.pdf. "While staff encountered a diverse pool of apps 
for kids created by hundreds of different developers, staff found little, if any, information in the app 
marketplaces about the data collection and sharing practices of these apps. " 
27 
 
4 Conclusions and recommendations 
 
Many types of data available on a smart mobile device are personal data. The relevant legal 
framework is the Data Protection Directive, in combination with the specific consent-
requirement contained in Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy directive. These rules apply to any app 
targeted to app users within the EU, regardless of the location of the app developer or app 
store. 
 
The fragmented nature of the app ecosystem, the wide range of technical access possibilities 
to data stored in or generated by mobile devices and the lack of legal awareness amongst 
developers create a number of serious data protection risks for app users. These risks range 
from a lack of transparency and lack of awareness amongst app users to poor security 
measures, invalid consent mechanisms, a trend towards data maximisation and elasticity of 
data processing purposes. 
 
There is an overlap of data protection responsibilities between the different parties involved in 
the development, distribution and technical capabilities of apps. Most conclusions and 
recommendations are aimed at app developers (in that they have the greatest control over the 
precise manner in which the processing is undertaken or information presented within the 
app), but often, in order for them to achieve the highest standards of privacy and data 
protection, they have to collaborate with other parties in the app ecosystem, such as the OS 
and device manufacturers, the app stores and third parties, such as analytics providers and 
advertising networks.  
 
App developers must 
 Be aware of, and comply with, their obligations as data controllers when they process data 
from and about users; 
 Be aware of, and comply with, their obligations as data controllers when they contract 
with data processors such as if they outsource the collection and processing of personal 
data to developers, programmers and for example cloud storage providers;  
 Ask for consent before the app starts to retrieve or place information on the device, i.e., 
before installation of the app. Such consent has to be freely given, specific and informed; 
 Ask for granular consent for each type of data the app will access; at least for the 
categories Location, Contacts, Unique Device Identifier, Identity of the data subject, 
Identity of the phone, Credit card and payment data, Telephony and SMS, Browsing 
history, Email, Social networks credentials and Biometrics; 
 Be aware that consent does not legitimise excessive or disproportionate data processing; 
 Provide well-defined and comprehensible purposes of the data processing in advance to 
installation of the app, and not change these purposes without renewed consent; provide 
comprehensive information if the data will be used for third party purposes, such as 
advertising or analytics; 
 Allow users to revoke their consent and uninstall the app, and delete data where 
appropriate; 
 Respect the principle of data minimisation and only collect those data that are strictly 
necessary to perform the desired functionality; 
 Take the necessary organisational and technical measures to ensure the protection of the 
personal data they process, at all stages of the design and implementation of the app 
(privacy by design), as defined in in section 3.6 of this Opinion; 
 Provide a single point of contact for the users of the app; 
28 
 
 Provide a readable, understandable and easily accessible privacy policy, which at a 
minimum informs users about:  
 who they are (identity and contact details),  
 what precise categories of personal data the app wants to collect and process,  
 why the data processing is necessary (for what precise purposes),  
 whether data will be disclosed to third parties (not just a generic but a specific 
description to whom the data will be disclosed), 
 what rights users have, in terms of withdrawal of consent and deletion of data;  
 Enable app users to exercise their rights of access, rectification, erasure and their right to 
object to data processing and inform them about the existence of these mechanisms; 
 Define a reasonable retention period for data collected with the app and predefine a period 
of inactivity after which the account will be treated as expired; 
 With regard to apps aimed at children: pay attention to the age limit defining children or 
minors in national legislation, choose the most restrictive data processing approach in full 
respect of the principles of data minimization and purpose limitation, refrain from 
processing children's data for behavioural advertising purposes, either directly or 
indirectly and refrain from collecting data through the children about their relatives and/or 
friends. 
 
The Working Party recommends that app developers 
 Study the relevant guidelines with regard to specific security risks and measures; 
 Proactively inform users about personal data breaches along the lines of the requirements 
of the ePrivacy Directive; 
 Inform users about their proportionality considerations for the types of data collected or 
accessed on the device, the retention periods of the data and the applied security measures; 
 Develop tools to enable users to customise retention periods for their personal data based 
on their specific preferences and contexts, rather than offering pre-defined retention terms; 
 Include information in their privacy policy dedicated to European users; 
 Develop and implement simple but secure online access tools for users, without collecting 
additional excessive personal data; 
 Together with the OS and device manufacturers and app stores use their creative talent to 
develop innovative solutions to adequately inform users on mobile devices, for example 
through a system of layered information notices combined with meaningful icons. 
 
App stores must 
 Be aware of, and comply with, their obligations as data controllers when they process data 
from and about users; 
 
Enforce the information obligation of the app developer, including the types of data the 
app is able to access and for what purposes, as well as whether the data is shared with 
third parties; 
 Give special attention to apps directed at children to protect against the unlawful 
processing of their data, and especially enforce the obligation to present the relevant 
information in a simple manner, in age specific language; 
 Provide detailed information on the app submission checks they actually perform, 
including those aimed to assess privacy and data protection issues.  
 
The Working Party recommends that app stores 
 
In collaboration with the OS manufacturer, develop control tools for users, such as 
symbols representing access to data on and generated by the mobile device;  
 Subject all apps to a public reputation mechanism;  
29 
 
 Implement a privacy friendly remote uninstall mechanism; 
 Provide feedback channels to users to report privacy and/or security problems; 
 Collaborate with app developers to pro-actively inform users about personal data 
breaches; 
 Warn app developers about the specificities of European law before submitting the 
application in Europe, for example about the consent requirement and in case of transfers 
of personal data to non-EU countries. 
 
OS and device manufacturers must 
 Update their APIs, store rules and user interfaces to offer users sufficient control to 
exercise valid consent over the data processed by apps; 
 Implement consent collection mechanisms in their OS at the first launch of the app or the 
first time the app attempts to access one of the categories of data that have significant 
impact on privacy; 
 Employ privacy by design principles to prevent secret monitoring of the user; 
 Ensure security of processing; 
 Ensure (the default settings of) pre-installed apps are compliant with European data 
protection law; 
 Offer granular access to data, sensors and services, in order to ensure that the app 
developer can only access those data that are necessary for his app; 
 Provide user-friendly and effective means to avoid being tracked by advertisers and any 
other third party. The default settings must be such as to avoid any tracking;  
 Ensure the availability of appropriate mechanisms to inform and educate the end user 
about what the apps can do and what data they are able to access;  
 Ensure that each access to a category of data is reflected in the information of the user 
before the app’s installation : the categories presented must be clear and comprehensible; 
 Implement a security-friendly environment, with tools to prevent malicious apps from 
spreading and allow each functionality to be installed/uninstalled easily.  
 
The Working Party recommends that OS and device manufacturers 
 Enable users to uninstall apps, and provide a signal (for example through the API) to the 
app developer to enable deletion of the relevant user data; 
 Systematically offer and facilitate regular security updates; 
 Ensure that methods and functions allowing access to personal data include features 
aiming to implement granular consent requests;  
 Actively help develop and facilitate icons alerting users to different data usage by apps; 
 Develop clear audit trails into the devices such that end users can clearly see which apps 
have been accessing data on their devices and the amounts of outgoing traffic per app, in 
relation to user-initiated traffic. 
 
Third parties must 
 Be aware of, and comply with, their obligations as data controllers when they process 
personal data about users; 
 Comply with the consent requirement determined in Article 5(3) of the ePrivacy Directive 
when they read or write data on mobile devices, in cooperation with the app developers 
and/or app stores, which essentially provide user with the information on the purposes of 
data processing;  
 Not circumvent any mechanism designed to avoid tracking, as it currently often happens 
with the "Do Not Track" mechanisms implemented in browsers;  
30 
 
 Communications service providers, when they issue branded devices, must ensure the 
valid consent of users for pre-installed apps and take on board relevant responsibilities 
when contributing to determining certain features of the device and of the OS, e.g. when 
limiting the user's access to certain configuration parameters or filtering fix releases 
(security and functional ones) provided by the device and OS manufacturers; 
 Advertising parties must specifically avoid delivering ads outside the context of the app. 
Examples are delivering ads by modifying browser settings or placing icons on the mobile 
desktop. Refrain from the use of unique device or subscriber identifiers for the purpose of 
tracking; 
 Refrain from processing children's data for behavioural advertising purposes, either 
directly or indirectly. Apply appropriate security measures. This includes secure 
transmission and encrypted storage of unique device and app user identifiers and other 
personal data. 
 
The Working Party recommends that third parties  
 
Develop and implement simple but secure online access tools for users, without collecting 
additional excessive personal data; 
 Only collect and process data that are consistent with the context where the user provides 
the data. 
 
Done at Brussels, on 27 February 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the Working Party 
The Chairman 
Jacob KOHNSTAMM 
 
